The universe doesn't care about your personal narrative.
You can just have met the person that is going to be the love of your life.
It's the culmination of your whole project for happiness.
And you step into the street and a truck hits you and you die.
That's mortality.
Mortality isn't just some far flung event.
It's that every moment we are subject to fate in that way.
So you can think of lots of little deaths you experience whenever all the projects
and the plans you make come up against the fact that the universe can just roll over them.
The following is a conversation with John Rovaki, a psychologist and
cognitive scientist at the University of Toronto.
I highly recommend his lecture series called Awakening from the Meaning Crisis,
which covers the history and future of humanity's search for meaning.
This is the Lex Friedman podcast.
To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description.
And now, dear friends, here's John Rovaki.
You have an excellent 50 part lecture series online on the Meaning Crisis.
And I think you describe in the modern times an increase in depression, loneliness,
cynicism and wait for it bullshit.
The term used technically by Harry Frankfurt and adopted by you.
So let me ask, what is meaning?
What are we looking for when we engage in the search for meaning?
So when I'm talking about meaning, I'm talking about what's called meaning in life,
not the meaning of life.
That's some sort of metaphysical claim.
Meaning in life are those factors that make people rate their lives as more
meaningful, worth living, worth the suffering that they have to endure.
And when you study that, what you see is it's a sense of connectedness,
connectedness to yourself, to other people, to the world and a particular
kind of connectedness.
You want to be connected to things that have a value and an existence
independent of your egocentric sort of preferences and concerns.
This is why, for example, having a child is considered very meaningful because
you're connecting to something that's going to have a life and a value
independent of you.
Now, the question that comes up for me, well, there's two questions.
One is, why is that at risk right now?
And then secondly, and I think you have to answer the second question first,
which is, well, yeah, but why is meaning so important?
Why is this sense of connectedness so important to human beings?
Why, when it is lacking, do they typically fall into depression,
potentially mental illness, addiction, self-destructive behavior?
And so the first answer I give you is, well, it's that sense of connectedness.
And people often express it metaphorically.
They want to be connected to something larger than themselves.
They want to matter.
They don't mean it literally.
I mean, if I chained you to a mountain, you wouldn't thereby say, oh, now my life
is so fulfilling, right?
So what they're trying to convey, they're using this metaphor to try and say,
they want to be connected.
They want to be connected to something real.
They want to make a difference and matter to it.
And one way of asking them, well, you know, what's meaningful is tell me what
you would like to continue to exist, even if you weren't around anymore.
And how are you connected to it and how do you matter to it?
That's one way of trying to get at what is the source of meaning for you is if
you were no longer there, you would like it to continue existing.
That's not the only part of the definition, probably, because there's
probably many things that aren't a source of meaning for me that maybe I find
beautiful, that I would like to continue existing.
Yes.
If it contributes to your life being meaningful, you're connected to it in
some way, and it matters to you, and you matter to it in that you make some
difference to it.
That's when it goes from being just sort of true, good, and beautiful to being
a source of meaning for you in your life.
Is the meaning crisis a new thing, or has it always been with us?
Is it part of the human condition in general?
That's an excellent question.
And part of the argument I made in Awakening for the Meaning Crisis is there's
two aspects to it.
One is that there are perennial problems, perennial threats to meaning.
And in that sense, human beings are always vulnerable to despair.
You know, the book of Ecclesiastes is, it's all vanity, it's all meaningless.
But there's also historical forces that have made those perennial problems
more pertinent, more pressing, more difficult for people to deal with.
And so the meaning crisis is actually the intersection of perennial problems,
finding existing, existence absurd, experiencing existential anxiety,
feeling alienated, and then pressing historical factors, which have to do
with the loss of the resources that human beings have typically crossed
historically and cross-culturally made use of.
Is there something potentially deeper than just a lack of meaning
that speaks to the fact that we're vulnerable to despair?
You know, Ernest Becker talked about the, in his book, The Nile of Death,
about the fear of death and being an important motivator in our life.
As William James said, death is the warm at the heart of life.
Death is the warm at the heart of life.
In our life, as William James said, death is the warm at the core of the human condition.
Is it possible that this kind of search for meaning is coupled or can be seen
from the perspective of trying to escape the reality, the thought of one's own mortality?
Yeah, Becker and the terror management theory that have come out of it.
There's been some good work around sort of providing empirical support for that claim.
Some of the work, not so good.
So which aspects do you find convincing?
Can you steelman that case and then can you argue against it?
So what aspects I find convincing is that human finitude, being finite,
being inherently limited is very problematic for us.
Given the extensive use of the word problematic, I like that you use that word
to describe one's own mortality as problematic.
Because people sort of on Twitter use the word problematic when they disagree with somebody.
But this to me seems to be the ultimate problematic aspect of the human condition
is that we die and it ends.
I think I'm not just agreeing with you, but I'm trying to get you to consider
that your mortality is not an event in the future.
It's a state you're in right now.
That's what I'm trying to shift.
So your mortality is just a, we talk about something that causes mortality fatal.
But what we actually mean is it's full of fate.
And I don't mean in the sense of things that are pre-written.
What I mean is the sense of the universe doesn't care about your personal narrative.
You can just have met the person that is going to be the love of your life.
It's the culmination of your whole project for happiness.
And you step into the street and a truck hits you and you die.
That's mortality.
Mortality isn't just some far flung event.
It's that every moment we are subject to fate in that way.
So you can think of lots of little deaths you experience whenever
all the projects and the plans you make come up against the fact
that the universe can just roll over them.
The death is the indifference of nature of the universe to your existence.
And so in that sense, it is always here with us.
Yeah, but you're vulnerable in so many ways other than just the ending of your biological life.
Because it's interesting if you rate what people fear most, death is not number one.
They often put public speaking as number one.
Because the death of status or reputation can also be a profound loss for human beings.
You can drive them into despair.
So as the terror management folks would say, as Ernest Becker would say that
a self-report on a survey is not an accurate way to capture what is actually
at the core of the motivation of a human being, that we could be terrified of death.
And from childhood, since we realized the absurdity of the fact that the right ends,
we've learned to really try to forget about it.
Try to construct illusions that allow us to escape momentarily
over prolonged periods of time the realization that we die.
So first, I took it seriously, but now I want to say why there's some empirical work
that makes me want to reconsider.
So terror management theory is you do things like you give people a list of words to read,
and in those words, in those lists are words associated with death, cough and funeral.
And then you see what happens to people.
And generally, they start to become more rigid in their thinking.
They tend to identify with their worldview.
They lose cognitive flexibility.
That's if you present it to them in that third person perspective.
But if you get them to go in the first person perspective and imagine that they're dying
and that the people that they care about are there with them, they don't show those responses.
In fact, they show us an increase in cognitive flexibility, an increase in openness.
See, so I'm trying to say we might be putting the cart before the horse.
The cart before the horse, it might not be death per se, but the kind of meaning that
is present or absent in depth.
That is the crucial thing for us.
By the way, to push back, I don't think you took it seriously.
I don't think you truly steelman the case because you're saying that death is always
present with us.
Yes, but isn't there a case to be made that it is one of the major motivators?
Nietzsche, Will to Power, Freud wanting to have sex with your mother,
all the different explanations of what is truly motivating us human beings.
Isn't there a strong case to be made that this death thing is a really damn good,
if not anything, a tool to motivate the behavior of humans?
I'm not saying that the avoidance of death is not significant for human beings, but I'm
proposing to you that human beings have a capacity for considering certain deaths
meaningful and certain deaths meaningless.
We have lots of evidence that people are willing to sacrifice their biological existence
for a death they consider meaningful.
Are you personally afraid of your death?
Do you think about it?
As somebody who produces a lot of ideas, records them, writes them down,
is a deep thinker, admired thinker, and as the years go on, become more and more admired.
Does it scare you that the ride ends?
No, I mean, you have to talk to me on all my levels.
I'm a biological organism, so something's thrown at my head all duck and things like that.
But if you're asking me, do I long to live forever?
No.
In the Buddhist tradition, there are practices that are designed to make you
aware of simultaneously the horror of mortality and the horror of immortality.
The thought of living forever is actually horrific to me.
Are those the only two options?
When you're sitting with a loved one or watching a movie you just really love or a book you really
love, you don't want it to end.
You don't necessarily always flip it to the other aspect, the complete opposite of the
thought experiment.
What happens if the book lasts forever?
There's got to be a middle ground, like the snooze button.
Sure, you don't want to sleep forever, but maybe press the snooze button and get an extra 15 minutes.
There's surely some kind of balance.
That fear seems to be a source of an intense appreciation of the moment, in part.
That's what the Stoics talked about, to meditate on once mortality.
Sure.
It seems to be a nice wake-up call to that life is full of moments that are beautiful,
and then you don't get an infinite number of them.
Right, and the Stoic response was not the project of trying to extend the duration of your life,
but to deepen those moments so they become as satisfying as possible so that when death comes,
it does not strike you as any kind of calamity.
Does that project ring true for your own personal feelings?
I think so.
Do you think about your mortality?
I used to.
I don't so much anymore.
Part of it, as I'm older, and your temporal horizon flips somewhere in your 30s or 40s,
you don't live from your birth, you live towards your death.
That's such a beautiful phrase.
The temporal horizon flips.
That's so true.
At what point is that, the point before which the world of opportunity and possibility is infinite
before you?
Yeah, it's like Peter Pan.
There's all these golden possibilities, and you fly around between them.
Yes, very much.
And then when it flips, you start to look for a different model.
The Socratic, the Stoic model, Buddhism has also influenced me, which is more about,
wait, when I look at my desires, I seem to have two meta-desires.
In addition to satisfying a particular desire, I want whatever satisfies my desire to be real.
And whatever is satisfying my desire to not cause internal conflict, but bring something
like peace of mind.
And so, I more and more move towards how can I live such that those two meta-desires
are a constant frame within which I'm trying to satisfy my specific desires.
What do you think happens after we die?
I think mind and life go away completely.
When we die, and I think that's actually significantly important for the kind of
beings that we are.
We are the kinds of beings that can come to that awareness, and then we have a responsibility
to decide how we're going to comport ourselves towards it.
Can you linger on what that means?
The mind goes away.
Like when you're playing music and the last instrument is put down, the song is over.
It doesn't mean the song wasn't beautiful.
It doesn't mean the song wasn't complex.
It doesn't mean the song didn't add to the value of the universe in its existence,
but it came to an end.
Is there some aspect in which some part of mind was there before the human
and remains after?
Something like panpsychism, or is it too much for us limited cognitive beings to understand?
Something like panpsychism, I take it seriously.
I don't think it's a ridiculous proposal, but I think it has insoluble problems that make me doubt it.
Any idea that the mind is some kind of ultimately immaterial substance also has,
for me, just devastating problems.
Those are the two kinds of framework that people usually propose
in order to support some kind of idea of immortality.
I find both very problematic.
The fact that we participate in distributed cognition,
that most of our problem solving is not done as individuals,
but in groups, this is something I've worked on.
I've published on that.
I think that's important.
But most of the people who do work on systems of distributed cognition think that while there's
such a thing as collective intelligence, there's no good evidence that there's collective consciousness.
In fact, it's often called zombie agency for that reason.
While I think it's very clear that no one person runs an airline,
and there's a collective intelligence that solves that problem,
I do not think that collective intelligence supports any kind of consciousness.
Therefore, I don't think the fact that I participate,
which I regularly and reliably do in distributed cognition,
gives me any reason to believe that that participation grounds some kind of consciousness.
Okay, there's so many things to mention there.
First of all, distributed cognition, maybe that's a synonym for collective intelligence,
so that means a bunch of humans individually are able to think, have cognitive machines,
and are somehow able to interact with a process of dialogue, as you talk about,
to morph different ideas together, like this idea landscape together.
It's so interesting to think about, okay, well, you do have these fascinating
distributed cognition systems, but consciousness does not propagate in the same way as intelligence.
But isn't there a case, if we just look at intelligence,
if we look at us humans as a collection of smaller organisms, which we are,
and so there's like a hierarchy of organisms, tiny ones work together to form
tiny villages that you can then start to see as individual organisms that are then also forming
bigger villages and interacting different ways, and function becomes more and more complex,
and eventually we get to us humans to where we start to think, well, we're an individual,
but really we're not. There's billions of organisms inside us, both domestic and foreign.
So isn't that building up consciousnesses, like turtles all the way up to us, our consciousness?
Why does it have to stop with us humans? Is this the face transition when it becomes
a zombie-like giant hierarchical village that first, there's like singing angels and
it's consciousness is born in just us humans? Do bacteria have consciousness? Not bacteria,
but maybe you could say bacteria does, but the interesting complicated organisms that are within
us have consciousness. I think it's proper to argue, and I have, that like a paramecium or
bacteria has a kind of agency and even a kind of intelligence, kind of sense-making ability,
but I do not think that we can attribute consciousness, at least what we mean by
consciousness, this kind of self-awareness, this ability to introspect, et cetera, et cetera,
to bacteria. Now, the reason why distributed cognition doesn't have consciousness, I think
is a little bit more tricky. And I think there's no reason in principle why there couldn't be a
consciousness for distributed cognition, collective intelligence. In fact, many philosophers would
agree with me on that point. I think it's more an issue of certain empirical facts,
bandwidth, density of connections, speed of information transfer, et cetera. It's conceivable
that if we got some horrible Frankensteinian neural link and we linked our brains and we had
the right density and dynamics and bandwidth and speed, that a group consciousness could take shape.
I don't have any argument in principle against that. I'm just saying those contingent facts do
not yet exist, and therefore, it is implausible that consciousness exists at the level of collective
intelligence. So you talk about consciousness quite a bit, so let's step back and try to sneak up
to a definition. What is consciousness? For me, there are two aspects to answering that question.
One is, what's the nature of consciousness? How does something like consciousness exist
in an otherwise apparently non-conscious universe? And then there's a function question, which is
equally important, which is, what does consciousness do? The first one is obviously
problematic for most people, like, yeah, consciousness seems to be so different from
the rest of the non-conscious universe. But I put it to you that the function question is also very
hard because you are clearly capable of very sophisticated, intelligent behavior without
consciousness. You are turning the noises coming out of my face hole into ideas in your mind and
you have no conscious awareness of how that process is occurring. So why do we have consciousness
at all? Now, here's the thing. There's an extra question you need to ask. Should we attempt to
answer those questions separately or should we attempt to answer them in an integrated fashion?
I make the case that you actually have to answer them in an integrated fashion,
what consciousness does and what it is. We should be able to give a unified answer to
both of those. Can you try to elucidate the difference between what consciousness is and what
it does, both of which are mysteries, as you say, state versus action? Can you try to explain the
difference that's interesting, that that's useful, that's important to understand? So that's putting
me in a bit of a difficult position because I actually argue that trying to answer them separately
is ultimately incoherent. But what I can point to are many published articles in which only one of
these problems is addressed and the other is left unaddressed. So people will try and explain what
qualia are, how they potentially emerge without saying, what do they do? What problems do they
help to solve? How do they make the organism more adaptive? And then you'll have other people who
say, no, no, this is what the function of consciousness is. But I can't tell you, I can't
solve the hard problem. I don't know how qualia exist. So what I'm saying is many people treat
these problems separately, although I think that's ultimately an incoherent way to approach the problem.
So the hard problem is focusing on what it is? Yes. So the qualia, that it feels like something
to experience a thing, that's what consciousness is, and does is more about the functional usefulness
of the thing. Yes. Yes. To the whole beautiful mix of cognition and just function in everyday life.
Okay. You've also said that you can do very intelligent things
without consciousness. Yes. Clearly. Is that obvious to you? Yes.
Yes. I don't know what I'm doing to access my memory. It just comes up. And it comes up really
intelligently. But the mechanisms that create consciousness could be deeply interlinked with
whatever is doing the memory access that's doing the cognition. Oh, I think so. Yes. Yes. So I guess
what I'm trying to say in this will probably sneak up to this question a few times, which is
whether we can build machines that are conscious or machines that are intelligent, human level
intelligence or beyond without building the consciousness. I mean, ultimately, that's one
of the ways to understand what consciousness is, is to is to build the thing. We can either sort of
from the Chomsky way, try to construct models like he thinks about language in this way,
try to construct models and theories of how the thing works, or we can just build the damn thing.
Exactly. And that's a methodological principle in cognitive science. In fact, one of the things
that sort of distinguishes cognitive science from other disciplines dealing with the nature of
cognition in the mind is that cognitive science takes the design stance. It asks, well, could we
build a machine that would not only simulate it, but serve as a bona fide explanation of the phenomena?
Do you find any efforts in cognitive science compelling in this direction?
In terms of how far we are, there's there's on the computational side of things,
something called cognitive modeling. There's all these kinds of packages that you can
construct simplified models of how the brain does things and see if complex behaviors emerge.
Do you find any efforts in cognitive or what efforts in cognitive science do you find
most inspiring and productive? I think the project of trying to create AGI,
artificial general intelligence, is where I place my hope of artificial intelligence
being of scientific significance. This is independent of technological socioeconomic
significance, which is already well, well established. But being able to say because
of the work in AI, we now have a good theory of cognition, intelligence, perhaps consciousness.
I think that's where I place my bets is in the current endeavors around
artificial general intelligence. And so tackling that problem head on, which has now
become central, at least to a group of cognitive scientists, is I think what needs to be done.
And when you think about AGI, do you think about systems that have consciousness?
Let's go back to what I think is at the core of your general intelligence.
So right now, compared to even our best machines, you are a general problem solver.
You can solve a wide variety of problems and a wide variety of domains. And some of our best
machines have a little bit of transfer. They can learn this game and play a few other
well designed rule bound games, but they couldn't learn how to swim,
ride or et cetera, things like that. And so what's interesting is what seems to come up,
and this is some of my published work, in all these different domains of cognition
across all these different problem types is a central problem. And since we do have good
sort of psychometric evidence that we do have some general ability that's a significant component
of our intelligence, I made an argument as to what I think that general ability is.
And so it's happening right now. The amount of information in this room that you could actually
pay attention to is combinatorial explosive. The amount of information you have in your memory,
long term memory and all the ways you could combine it, combinatorial explosive. The number
of possibilities you can consider also combinatorial explosive. The sequences of behavior you can
generate also combinatorial explosive. And yet somehow you're zeroing in. The right memories
are coming up. The right possibilities are opening up. The right sequences of behavior,
you're paying attention to the right thing, not infallibly so, but so much so that you reliably
find obvious what you should interact with in order to solve the problem at hand. That's an
ability that is still not well understood within AGI. It's a filtering out the gigantic waterfall
of data. Right. It's almost like a Zen Cohen. What makes you intelligent is your ability to ignore
so much information and do it in such a way that it's somewhere between arbitrary guessing
and algorithmic search. And to a fault sometimes, of course, that you, based on the models you
construct, you forget. You ignore things that you should probably not ignore. And that hopefully we
can circle back to it, Lex, is related to the meaning issue because the very processes that
make us adaptively intelligent make us perennially susceptible to self-deceptive,
self-destructive behavior because of the way we miss frame the environment in fundamental ways.
So to you, meaning is also
connected to ideas of wisdom and truth and how we interpret and understand
and interact intellectually with the environment. Yes. So what is wisdom? Why do we long for it?
How do we, and where do we find it? What is it? Intelligence is what you use to solve your problems
as I was just describing. Rationality is how you use your intelligence to overcome the problems
of self-deception that emerge when you're trying to solve your problems. So it's that matter problem.
And then the issue is, do you have just one kind of knowing? I think you have multiple ways of
knowing, and therefore you have multiple rationalities. And so wisdom is to coordinate
those rationalities so that they are optimally constraining and affording each other. So in
that way, wisdom is rationally self-transcending rationality. Right. So life is a kind of process
where you jump from rationality to rationality and pick up a village of rationalities along
the way that then turns into wisdom. Yes, it's properly coordinated. You mentioned framing.
Yes. So what is framing? Is it a set of assumptions you bring to the table in
how you see the world, how you reason about the world, how you understand the world?
So it depends what you mean by assumptions. If it by assumption you mean a proposition,
representational, or rule, I think that's much more downstream from relevance realization.
I think relevance realization refers to, again, constraints on how you are paying attention.
And so for me, talking about framing is talking about this process you're doing right now of
salience landscaping. What's salient to you? And how is what salient constantly shifting
in a sort of a dynamic tapestry? And how are you shaping yourself to the way that salience
landscaping is aspectualizing the world, shaping it into aspects for interaction?
For me, that is a much more primordial process than any sort of belief we have. And here's why.
If we mean by beliefs, you know, representational proposition, then we're in this very problematic
position because then we're trying to say that propositions are ultimately responsible for how
we do relevance realization. And that's problematic because representations presuppose
relevance realization. So I represent this as a cup. The number of properties it actually has
and that I even have epistemic access to is combinatorial explosive. I select from those a
subset and how they are relevant to each other insofar as they are relevant for me. This doesn't
have to be a cup. I could be using it as a hat. I can use it to stand for the letter V.
All kinds of different things. I could say this was the 10th billion object made in North America.
Representations presuppose relevance realization. They are therefore dependent on it,
which means relevance realization isn't bound to our representational structures. It can be
influenced by them, but they are ultimately dependent on relevance realization.
Let's define stuff. Relevance realization. Yes.
What are the inputs and the outputs of this thing? What is it? What are we talking about?
What we're talking about is how you are doing something very analogous to evolution.
So if you think about that adaptivity isn't in the organism or in the environment,
but in a dynamical relation and then what does evolution do? It creates variation and then it
puts selective pressure and what that does is that changes the niche constructions that are
available to a species. It changes the morphology. You also have a loop. It's your sensory motor loop
and what's constantly happening is there are processes within you that are opening up variation
and also processes that are putting selection on it and you're constantly evolving that
sensory motor loop. So you might call your cognitive fittedness, which is how you're framing
the world is constantly evolving and changing. I can give you two clear examples of that.
One, your autonomic nervous system, parasympathetic and sympathetic. The sympathetic system is biased
to trying to interpret as much of reality as threat or opportunity. The parasympathetic is
biased to trying to interpret as much of the environment as safe and relaxing and they are
constantly doing opponent processing. There's no little man in you calculating your level of arousal.
There's this dynamic coupling opponent processing between them that is constantly evolving your
arousal. Similarly, your attention, you have the default mode network, task network. The default
mode network is putting pressure on you right now to mind wander, to go off, to drift and then
the task focus network is selecting out of those possibilities the ones that will survive and go
into and so you're constantly evolving your attention. Okay, so there's a natural selection
of ideas that a bunch of systems within you are generating and then you use the natural selection.
What is the selector, the object that you're interacting with, the glass? Relevance realization
once again, you just describe how it happens. Yes. You can describe what the hell it is.
So what are we talking about? So relevance realization is how you interact with things
in the world to make sense of why they matter, what they mean to you, to your life.
Yes, and notice the language you just used. You're starting to use the meaning in life language.
That's good. Okay. That's good. So what does that evolution of your sensory motor loop do?
It gives you, and here I'll use the term for Marla Ponty, it gives you an optimal grip on
the world. So let's use your visual attention again. Okay, here's an object. How close should I be to
it? Is there a right? That's what you want to do with it. Exactly. Exactly. So you have to evolve
your sensory motor loop in order to get the optimal grip that actually creates the affordance
of you getting to a goal that you're trying to get to. Yeah, but you're describing physical goals
of manipulating objects. So this applies, the task, the process of relevance realization
is not just about getting a glass of water and taking a drink. No. It's about falling in love.
Yeah, of course. What else is there? Well, there's obvious between those two options. I can show you
how you're optimally gripping in an abstract cognitive domain. Okay, so a mammal goes by
and most people will say there's a dog. Now, why don't they say they might, but typically,
probabilistically, they'll say there's a dog. They could say there's a German Shepherd,
there's a mammal, there's a living organism, there's a police dog. Why that, why there?
Why did they stop Eleanor Rush called these basic level? Well, what you find is that's an
optimal grip because it's getting you the best overall balance between similarity within your
category and difference between the other categories. It's allowing you to properly fit
to that object insofar as you're setting yourself up to, well, I'm getting so, as many of the
similarities and differences I can on balance because they're in a trade-off relationship
that I need in order to probably interact with this mammal. That's optimal grip, not right?
It's at the level of your categorization. You evolve these models of the world around you
and on top of them, you do stuff like you build representations, like you said.
Yes. What's the salience landscape? Salience meaning attention landscape.
So, salience is what grabs your attention or what results from you directing your attention.
So, I clap my hands that salient, it grabs your attention, your attention is drawn to it,
that's bottom up, but I can also say you left big toe and now it's salient to you because you
directed your attention towards it, that's top down. And again, opponent processing going on there.
So, whatever stands out to you, what grabs your attention, what arouses you, what triggers at
least momentarily some affect towards it, that's how things are salient. What salience, I would
argue, is how a lot of unconscious relevance realization makes information relevant to
working memory. That's when it now becomes online for direct sensory motor interaction with the
world. So, you think the salience landscape, the ocean of salience extends into the subconscious
mind? I think relevance does, but I think when relevance is recursively processed,
relevance realization such that it passes through sort of this higher filter of working memory and
has these properties of being globally accessible and globally broadcast, then it becomes the thing
we call salience. Look, that's really good evidence, there's really good evidence from my
colleague at U of T, University of Toronto, Lynn Hasher, that that's what working memory is. It's
a higher order relevance filter. That's why things like chunking will get way more information
through working memory because it's basically basically monitoring how much relevance realization
has gone into this information. Usually, you have to do an additional kind of recursive processing
and that tells you, by the way, when do you need consciousness? When do you need
that working memory and that salience landscaping? It's when you're facing situations that are highly
novel, highly complex and very old defined, that require you to engage working memory.
Okay, got it. So, relevance realization is in part the thing that constructs that basic level
thing of a dog. When you see it, when you see a dog, you call it a dog, not a German Shepherd,
not a mammal, not a biological meat bag, it's a dog. Wisdom. So, what is wisdom?
If we return, I think it's part of that, we got to relevance realization.
And then wisdom is a accumulation of rationalities. He described the rationality as a kind of
starting from intelligence, much of puzzle solving. And then rationality is like the
meta problem of puzzle solving. And then what wisdom is the meta-meta problem of puzzle solving?
Yes, in the sense that the meta problem you have when you're solving your puzzles is that you can
often fall into self-deception. You can mis-freind. Self-deception, right.
So, whereas knowledge overcomes ignorance, wisdom is about overcoming foolishness. If what we mean
by foolishness is self-deceptive, self-destructive behavior, which I think is a good definition
of foolishness. And so, what you're doing is you're doing this recursive relevance realization.
You're using your intelligence to improve the use of your intelligence. And then you're using
your rationality to improve the use of your rationality. That's that recursive relevance
realization I was talking about a few minutes ago. Think about a wise person. They come into highly
often messy, ill-defined, complex situations, usually where there's some significant novelty.
And what can they do? They can zero in on what really matters, what's relevant, and then they
can shape themselves, salience landscaping, to intervene most appropriately to that situation
as they have framed it. That's what we mean by a wise person. And that's how it follows out of
the model I've been presenting to you. So, when you say self-deception, I mean,
part of that implies that it's intentional. Part of the mechanism of cognition,
you're modifying what you should know for some purpose. Is that how you see the word self-deception?
No, because I belong to a group of people that think the model of self-deception as lying to
oneself ultimately makes no sense. Because in order to lie to you, I have to know something you
don't, and I have to depend on your commitment to the truth in order to modify your behavior.
I don't think that's what we do to ourselves. I think, and I'm going to use it in the technical
term, and thank you for making space for that earlier on, I think we can bullshit ourselves,
which is a very different thing than lying.
So, what is bullshit? And how do we bullshit ourselves, technically speaking?
Yeah, Frankfurt, and this is inspired by Frankfurt and other people's work
based on Frankfurt's work. On bullshit.
Yeah, classic essay. It's a pretty good title.
I think it's one of the best things he wrote. He wrote a lot of good things.
The title or the essay? The essay. Title's good too. It's always an icebreaker in certain academic
settings. So, let's contrast the bullshit artist from the liar. The liar depends on your commitment
to the truth. The bullshit artist is actually trying to make you indifferent to the question of truth
and modify your behavior by making things salient to you so that they are catchy to you.
So, a prototypical example of bullshit is a commercial, a television commercial.
You watch these people at a bar getting some particular kind of alcohol, and they're
gorgeous, and they're laughing, and they're smiling, and they're clear-eyed.
You know that's not true, and they know you know it's not true, but here's the point.
You don't care because there's gorgeous people smiling, and they're happy, and that's salient to
you, and that catches your attention. And so, you know, go into a bar. You know that won't happen
when you drink this alcohol. You know it, but you buy the product because it was made salient to you.
Now, you can't lie to yourself, Lex. Salience can catch attention, but attention can drive
salience. So, this is what I can do. I can make something salient by paying attention to it,
and then that will tend to draw me back to it again, which, and you see what happens, which
means it tends to catch my attention more so that when I go into the store, that bottle of liquor
catches my attention, and I buy it. And that's, why is that bullshit?
Because what you're doing is being caught up in the salience of things
independent from whether or not that salience is tracking reality.
Is it independent or is it loosely connected? Because it's not so obvious to me when I see
happy people at a bar that I don't in part believe that, well, my experience has been
may be different. Logically, I can understand, but maybe there is a bar out there
where it's all happy people dancing. In fact, most of the bars I go to these days in Texas
is pretty, lots of happy people. I think you can, I mean, there's probably variation,
although I think it's very, the truth-seeking in there. Let's say the intent is at least to try
and shut off your truth-seeking. It might not completely succeed, but that's the intent.
At times, it can completely succeed because I can give you pretty much gibberish and you
never let it will motivate your behavior. There's an episode from the classic Simpsons,
not the modern Simpsons, the classic Simpsons, where there's aliens and they're running for
office in the United States. Now, I'm a Canadian, so this doesn't quite work for me,
and this speech goes like this. My fellow Americans, when I was young, I dreamt of being a
baseball, but we must move forward, not backward, upward, not forward, twirling, twirling towards
freedom, and people go, and there's a rush. There's nothing there, and yet it's great satire
because a lot of political speech is exactly like that. There's nothing there.
I'm not saying all political speech, I said a lot.
No, but there is a fundamental difference between, and it's so hilarious, I remember
that episode, there is a fundamental difference between that absurd sort of non-secular speech
and political speech because one of the things is political speech is grounded in some sense of truth.
And so, if that requires you talking about alternative facts and weird self-destructive
oxymoronic phrases, isn't that approaching pure bullshit?
No, I think pure bullshit like the vacuum is very difficult to get to, but I get the point.
So, what exactly is truth? Is it possible to know?
I think Spinoza is right about truth, that truth is only known by its own standard,
which sounds circular. There's a way in which he didn't mean that circularly,
and I think this is also converges with Plato. These are two huge influences on me.
I think we only know the truth retrospectively when we go through some process of self-transcendence,
when we move from a frame to a more encompassing frame so that we can see the limitations and
the distortions of the earlier frame. You have this when you have a moment of insight.
Insight is you doing, you are realising what is relevant. You go, oh, oh, I thought she was
aggressive and angry. She's actually really afraid. I was misframing this. And you change
what you find relevant. You have those aha moments. So, do you think it's possible
to get a sense of objective reality? So, is it possible to have to get to the ground level of
what something that you can call objective truth? Or is it, are we always on shaky ground?
I think those moments of transcendence can never get us to an absolute view from nowhere.
So, this is Drew Highland's notion of finite transcendence. We are capable of self-transcendence,
and therefore we are creatures who can actually raise the question of truth or goodness or beauty,
because I think they all share this feature. But that doesn't mean we can transcend to a
godhood, to some absolute view from nowhere that takes in all information
and organizes it in a comprehensive whole. But that doesn't mean that truth is thereby
rendered valueless. I think a better term is real. And real and illusory are comparative terms.
You only know that something's an illusion by taking something else to be real. And so,
we're always in a comparative task. But that doesn't mean that we can somehow jump outside
of our framing in some final manner and say, this is how it is from a god's eye point of view.
So, what do you think, if I may ask, of somebody like Ayn Rand and her philosophy of objectivism?
So, where the core principle is that reality exists independently of consciousness and that
human beings have direct contact with reality through sense perception. So, you do have that
ability to know reality. There's two things. Knowing that there's an independent reality
is not knowing that independent reality. Those are not the same thing.
Yeah, but I think objectivism would probably say that our human reason is able to have contact
with that. Then I would respond and say, I believe, in fact, ultimately, in a conformity
theory of knowing that the deepest kind of knowing is when there's a contact, a conformity
between the mind, with the embodied mind and reality. And here's where I guess I'd push back
on Rand. I would say, you have to acknowledge partial knowledge as real knowledge,
because if you don't, you're going to fall prey to Mino's paradox.
Mino's paradox is, you know, this is in Plato, right? To know P. Well, if I don't know P,
I'm going to go looking for it. But if I don't know P, how could I possibly recognize it when I
found it? I have no way of recognizing it. I have no way of knowing that I found it.
So I must know P. But if I know P, then I don't need to learn about it. I don't need to go searching.
So learning doesn't exist. Knowledge is impossible. The way you break out of that paradox is saying,
no, no, no, it is partial. It is possible to partially know something. I can know it enough
that it will guide me to recognizing it, but that's not the same as having a complete grasp of it,
because I still have to search and find what I don't yet possess in my knowledge.
Partial knowledge has to be real knowledge. Right. Partial knowledge is still knowledge.
Yes. What do you think about somebody like Donald Hoffman, who thinks the reality is an illusion,
so complete illusion, that we're given this actually really nice definition or idea that
you talked about, that there's a tension between the illusory and the, and what is real.
He says that basically we taken that and we ran with the real to the point where the real is
not at all connected to some kind of physical reality.
Well, I hope to talk to him at some point. We were supposed to talk at one point,
and so I have to talk in his absence. I think that, first of all, I think
saying that everything in his illusion is saying everything is tall. It doesn't make any sense.
It's a comparative term. You have to say, against this standard of realness, this is an illusion.
He uses arguments from evolution, which are problematic to me, because it's like, well,
you seem to be saying that evolution is true, that it really exists, and then some of our
cognition and a perception has access to reality, math, and presumably some science has access to
reality. Then what he seems to be saying is, well, a lot of your everyday experience is illusory,
but we do have some contact with reality whereby we can make the arguments as to why most of your
experience, most of your everyday experience is an illusion. To me, that's not a novel thing.
That's Descartes. That's the idea that most of our sense experience is untrustworthy,
but the math is what connects us to reality. That's how he interpreted the Copernican revolution.
Oh, look, we're all seeing the sun rise and move over and set, and it's all an illusion,
but the math, the math gets us to the reality. Well, I think he makes a deeper point that most
of cognition is just evolved and operates in the illusory world. How does he know that things
like cognition and evolution exist? I think there's an important distinction between evolution
and cognition. That's not the point I'm making. I'm making a point that he's claiming that there
are two things that really exist. Why are they privileged? He basically says that, look, the
process of evolution makes sense. Yes. It makes sense that you get complex organisms from simple
organisms through the natural selection process. Here's how you get to transfer information from
generation to generation. It makes sense. Then he says that there's no requirement for the cognition
to evolve in a way that it would actually perceive and have direct contact with the physical reality.
Accept that cognition evolved in such a way that it could perceive the truth of evolution,
and you can't treat evolution like an isolated thing. Evolution depends on Darwinian theory,
genetics. It depends on understanding plate tectonics, the way the environment changes.
It depends on how chromosomes are structured. Actually, that's an interesting question to him
where I don't know if he actually would push back on this, is how do you know evolution is real?
Yes. I think he would be open to the idea that it is part of the illusion that we constructed,
that in some sense it is connected to reality, but we don't have a clear picture of it.
That's an intellectually honest statement then. If most of our cognition as thinking beings is
operating at every level in an illusory world, then it makes sense that one of the main theories
of science that's evolution is also a complete part of this illusory world.
Right. But then what happens to the premise for his argument leading to the conclusion
that cognition is illusory? I think he makes a very specific argument about evolution as an
explanation of why the world is of our cognition operating in an illusory world, but that's just
one of the explanations. I think the deeper question is why do we think we have contact with
reality, with physical reality? We could be very well living in a virtual world constructed by
our minds in a way that makes that world deeply interesting in some ways, whether it's somebody
playing a video game or we're trying to, through the process of distributed cognition, construct
more and more complex objects. Why does it have to be connected to
physics and planets and all that kind of stuff? If we're going to say we're now
considering it as a possibility rather than it's a conclusion based on arguments,
because the arguments, again, will always rely on stipulating that there is something that is known.
These are the features of cognition. Cognition is capable of illusion. That's a true statement.
You're somehow in contact with the mind. Why does the mind have this privileged contact
and other aspects like my body do not? Let's put that aside and now let's just consider it.
Now, when we put it that way, it's not an epistemic question anymore. It's an existential question,
and here's my reply to you. There's two possibilities. Either the illusion is one that I cannot discover,
sort of the matrix on steroids or something. There's no way, no matter what I do, I can't find out
that it's an illusion. Or it's an illusion, but I can find out that it's an illusion.
Those are the two possibilities. Nothing changes for me if those are the two possibilities,
because if I could not possibly find out, it is irrational for me to pay any attention
to that possibility. I should keep doing the science as I'm doing it. If there's a way of
finding out, science is my best bet, I believe, for finding out what's true and what's an illusion.
So I keep doing what I'm doing. So it's an argument, if you move it to that,
that makes no existential difference to me. Oh, man, that is such a deeply philosophical argument.
No, no, no, no, no, no. Nobody's saying science doesn't work. It's an interesting question,
just like before humans were able to fly, they would ask a question, can we build a machine
that makes us fly? In that same way, we're asking a question to which we don't know an answer,
but we may know in the future how much of this whole thing is an illusion. And I think in a
second category, the first guy, I forgot which one, yes, science will be able to help us discover
this. Otherwise, yes, for sure, it doesn't matter. If we're living in a simulation and we can't find
out at all, then it doesn't matter. But yes, the whole point is, as we get deeper and deeper
understanding of our mind of cognition, we might be able to discover like how much of this is a
big charade constructed by our mind to keep us fed or something like that. Some weird,
some weird, very simplistic explanation that will ultimately in its simplicity be beautiful.
Or as we try to build robots and instill them, instill them with consciousness,
with ability to feel those kinds of things. We'll discover, well, let's just trick them
into thinking they feel and have consciousness and they'll believe it. And then they'll have a
deeply fulfilling and meaningful lives. And on top of that, they will interact with us in a way
they'll make our lives more meaningful. And then all of a sudden, it's like at the end of Animal
Farm, you look at pigs and humans, you look at robots and humans, you can't tell the difference
between either. And we in that way start to understand that that so much of this existence
could be an illusion. Okay, well, I have two responses to that. First is the progress that's
being made on like AGI is about making whatever the system is that's going to be the source of
intelligent, more and more dynamically and recursively self-correcting. That's part of what's
happening. Extrapolating from that, you get a system that gets better and better at self-correcting,
but that's exactly what I was describing before as the transformative theory of truth.
The other response to that is science, like people think of science just as, right,
sort of end proposition. Let me just use the evolutionary example again.
If I'm gathering the evidence, I need to know a lot of geology. I need to know plate tectonics.
I need to know about radioactive decay. I need to know about genetics. And then in order to
measure all those things, I need to know how microscopes work. I need to know how pencils
and paper work. I need to know how rulers work. I need to know how English, like you can't isolate
knowledge that way. And if you say, well, most of that's an illusion, then you're in a weird position
of saying somehow all of these illusions get to this truth claim. I think it goes in reverse.
If you think this is the truth claim, right, the measuring and all the things that scientists
would do to gather on all the ways the theories are converging together, that also has to be
fundamentally right. Because it's not like Lego. It is an interwoven whole.
Yes, it definitely is interwoven. But I love how I play that. I'm playing the devil advocate for
the illusion world. But there's an aspect to truth that has to be consistent, deeply consistent
across an entire system. But inside a video game, that's some kind of consistency evolves.
There's rules about interactions. There's game theoretic patterns about what's good and bad and
so on. And there's sources of joy and fear and anger and then understanding about a world,
what happens in different dynamics of a video game, even simple video games. So there's no,
you know, even inside an illusion, you can have consistency and develop truths inside
that illusion and iteratively evolve your truth with the illusion.
Okay, but that comes back. Is that process genuinely self-correcting or are you in the
simulation in which there is no possible doorway out? Because if my argument is, if you find one
or two doorways, that feeds back. In fact, you can't just say, this is the little tiny island
where we have the truth. That's the point I'm making.
Right. But what if you find that, I think there is doorways, if that's the case. And what if you
find a doorway and you step out, but you're yet in another simulation. I mean, that's the point.
That's so self-correcting. When you fix the self-deception, you don't know if there's other
bigger self-deceptions you're operating on. Of course, in one sense, that's right. But again,
we're back to, when I step into the second simulation, is it, can I get the doorway out of
that or right? Because if you just make the infinite regressive simulations, you've basically said,
I have a simulation that I can never get out of. Yeah, I think there's always a bigger pile
of bullshit is the claim I'm trying to make here. Okay. Let me dance around meaning once more.
I often ask people on this podcast or at a bar or to imaginary people I talk to in a room when
I'm all by myself, the question of the meaning of life. Do you think this is a useful question?
You drew a line between meaning in life and meaning of life. Do you think this is a useful
question? No, I think it's like the question, what's north of the North Pole or what time is it on
the sun? It sounds like a question, but it's actually not really a question because it has a
presupposition in it that I think is fundamentally flawed. If I understand what people mean by it,
and it's actually often not that clear, but when they talk about the meaning of life,
they are talking about there are some feature of the universe in and of itself that I have to
discover and enter into a relationship with. And there's, in that sense, a plan for me or
something. And so that's a property of the universe. That's a very deep,
serious metaphysical ontological claim. You're claiming to know something fundamental
about the structure of reality. There were times when people thought they had a worldview that
legitimated it, like God is running the universe and therefore, and God cares about you and there's
a plan, et cetera. But I think a better way of understanding meaning is not,
meaning is like the graspability. I remember I talked about optimal grip. It's like the
graspability of that cup. Is that in me? No. Is it in the cup? No, because the fly can't grasp it.
Well, graspability is in my hand. Well, I can't grasp Africa. No, no. There is a real relation
fittedness between me and this cup. Same thing with the adaptivity of an organism.
Is the adaptivity of a great white shark in the great white shark? Drop it in the sohara, dies.
Meaning isn't in me. I think that's romantic bullshit. And it isn't in the universe. It is
a proper relationship. I've coined the phrase transjective. It is the binding relationship
between this objective and the objective. And therefore, when you're asking the question
about the meaning of life, you are, I think, misrepresenting the nature of meaning. Just
like when you ask what time is it on the sun, you're misrepresenting how we derive clock time.
At the risk of disagreeing with a man who did 50 lectures on the meaning crisis,
let me hard disagree. But I think we'll probably agree. But it's just like a dance,
like any dialogue. I think meaning of life gets at the same kind of relationship between you and
the glass of water, between whatever the forces of the universe that created the planets, the proteins,
the multicell organisms, the intelligent early humans, the beautiful human civilizations and
the technologies that will overtake them. It's trying to understand the relevance realization
of the big bang to the feeling of love you have for another human being.
It's reaching for that even though it's hopeless to understand. It's the question,
the asking of the question is the reaching. Now, it is, in fact, romantic bullshit, technically
speaking. But it could be that romantic bullshit is actually the essence of life and the source of
its deepest meaning. Well, I hope not. But technically speaking, romantic bullshit, meaning
romantic. In the philosophical sense, yes. So I mean, what is poetry? What is music? What is the
magic you feel when you hear a beautiful piece of music? What is that? Oh, but that's exactly to my
point. Is music inside you? Or is it outside you? It's both and neither. And that's precisely why
you find it so meaningful. In fact, it can be so meaningful, you can regard it as sacred.
What you said, I don't think, and you preface that we might not be in disagreement,
right? What you said is, no, no, no, there is a way in which reality is realizing itself.
And I want my relevance realization to be in the best possible relationship that, the sort of
meta-optimal grip to what is most real. I totally agree. I totally think that's one of the things
I said this earlier. One of our meta-desires is whatever is satisfying our desires is also real.
I do this with my students. I'll say, you know, because romantic relationships sort of take the
role of God and religion and history and culture for us right now. We put everything on them,
and that's why they break. But, right? Strong words. Got it. But I'll say to them,
okay, how many of you are in really satisfying romantic relationships? Put up your hands. Then
I'll say, okay, I'm not only talking to these people. Of those people, how many of you would
want to know your partner's cheating on you even if it means the destruction of the relationship?
95% of them put up their hands. And I say, but why? And here's my students who are usually all
sort of bitten with cynicism and postmodernism, and they'll just say spontaneously, well,
because it's not real. Because it's not real. Right? So I think what you're pointing to is actually
you're pointing not to an objective or a subjective thing. Romanticism says it's subjective.
There's some sort of, I guess, like positivism or Lockean empiricism says it's objective,
but you're saying, no, no, no, there's reality realization. And can I get relevance realization
to be optimally gripping in the best right relationship with it? And there's good reason
you can because think about it. Your relevance realization isn't just representing properties
of the world. It's instantiating it. There's something very similar to biological evolution,
which is that the guts of life, if I'm right, running your cognition is not just that you
have ideas, you actually instantiate. That's what I mean by conformity. The same principles,
they're within and without. They don't belong to you subjectively. They're not just out there.
They're both at the same time. And they help to explain how you're actually bound to the
evolutionary world. Yeah, so it comes from both inside and from the outside. But that's still
the question of the meaning of life. First of all, the big benefit of that question is that it shakes
you out of your hamster in a wheel that is daily life, the mundane process of daily life,
where you have a schedule, you wake up, you have kids, you have to take them to school,
then you go to work and repeats over and over and over and over, and then you get
increased salary, and then you upgrade the home and that whole process.
Meaning, asking about the meaning of life is so full of romantic bullshit
that if you take it, if you just allow yourself to take it seriously for a second,
it forces you to pause and think, like, what's going on here? And then it ultimately,
I think, does return to the question of meaning in those mundane things. What gives
what gives my life joy? What gives it lasting deliciousness? Where do I notice the magic and
how can I have that magic return again and again? Beauty. And that ultimately what it returns to.
But it's the same thing you do when you look up to the sky. You spend most of your day hurrying
around looking at things on the surface. But when you look up to the sky and you see the stars,
it fills you with the feeling of awe that forces you to pause and think in full context of, like,
what the hell is going on here? That, but also I think there is a,
when you think too much about the meaning of a glass and a relevance realization of a glass,
you don't necessarily get at the core of what makes music beautiful.
So sometimes you have to start at the biggest picture first. And I think meaning of life forces
you to really go to the big bang and go, go, go to the, go to the universe and the whole thing,
the origin of life. And I think sometimes you have to start there to discover the meaning in
the day to day, I think. But perhaps you would disagree.
Insofar as the question makes you ask about the, the, the whole of your life and how much
meaning is in the whole of your life. And insofar as it asks how much that is connected to reality,
it's a good question. But it's a bad question in that it also makes you look for the answers
in the wrong way. Now you said, and I agree with what you said, what, how we really answer
this question is we come back to the meaning in life and we see how much that meaning in life
is connected to reality. We pursue wisdom. And so for me, the, I don't need that question in
order to provoke me into that stance. So let's return to the meaning crisis. Yes.
What is the nature of the meaning crisis in modern times? What's its origin? What's the
explanation? Well, remember what I said, what I argued that the very processes that make us
adaptively intelligent subject us to perennial problems of self deception, self destruction,
creating bullshit for ourselves, for other people, all of that. And that can cause all,
you know, anxiety, existential anxiety. It can cause despair. It can cause a sense of absurdity.
These are perennial problems. And across cultures and across historical periods,
human beings have come up with ecologies of practices. There's no one practice. There's
no panacea practice. They've come up with ecologies of practices for ameliorating
that self deception and enhancing that fittedness, that connectedness that's at the core of meaning
in life. That's prototypically what we call wisdom. And here's how I can show you one clear instance
of the meaning crisis is it's a wisdom famine. I can, I do this regularly with my students
in the classroom. I'll say, where do you go for information? They hold up their phone.
Where do you go for knowledge? They're a little bit slower and probably because they're in my
class, they'll say, well, science, the university. I'll say, where do you go for wisdom?
There's a silence. Wisdom isn't optional. That's why it is perennial, cross-cultural,
cross-historical, because of the perennial problems. But we do not have homes for ecologies of
practices that fit into our scientific technological worldview so that they are
considered legitimate. The fastest growing demographic group are the nuns, NONESs. They
have no religious allegiance, but they are not primarily atheistic. They most frequently describe
themselves with this very, this has become almost everybody now describe, I'm spiritual,
but not religious, which means they are trying to find a way of reducing the bullshit
and enhancing the connectedness, but they don't want to turn to any of the legacy established
religions by and large. Well, isn't both religion and the nuns, isn't wisdom a process, not a
destination? So trying to find, if you're a deeply faithful religious person, you're also
trying to find. So just because you have a place where you're looking or a set of traditions around
which you're constructing the search, it's nevertheless a search. So I guess, is there a
case to be made that this is just the usual human condition? How do you answer? If you asked
five centuries ago, where do you look for wisdom? I mean, I suppose people would be more inclined to
answer while the Bible or a religious text. Right. And they had a worldview that was considered
not just religious, but also rational. So we now have these two things,
orthogonal or often oppositional, spirituality and rationality. But if you go before a particular
historical period, you look back in the Neoplatonic tradition, like before the
the scientific revolution, those two are not in opposition. They are deeply interwoven
so that you can have a sense of legitimacy and deep realness and grounding in your practices.
We don't have that anymore. And I'm not advocating for religion. Neither am I an enemy of religion.
I'll strengthen your case, by the way. So one of my RAs did research and you get people who are,
have committed themselves to cultivating wisdom and you can look at people within religious
traditions and people who are doing it in a purely secular framework. By many of the measures we
used to try to study wisdom scientifically, the people in the religious paths do better
than the secular. But here's the important point. There's no significant difference between
the religious paths. So it's not like if you're, you know, following the path of Judaism, you're
more likely to end up wiser than if you follow Buddhism. By the way, I don't know if that's
my case. I was making the case that you don't need to have a religious affiliation to search for
wisdom. It's that I thought along to the point you just made that it doesn't matter which religious
affiliation or none. But that's what I'm saying. Okay, so this is the tricky thing we're in.
Yeah. It does matter if you're in one, but it doesn't matter sort of the propositional creeds
of that. There's something else at work. There's a, if you allow me this, there's a
functionality to religion that we lost when we rejected all the propositional dogma. But there's
a functionality there that we don't know how to recreate. Yeah, what is that? Can you try to
speak to that? What is that functionality? What is that? Why is that so useful? A bunch of stories,
a bunch of myths, a bunch of narratives that are drenched in like deep lessons about morality and
all those kinds of things. What is the, what's the, what's the functional thing there that can't be
replaced without a religious text by non religious text? This is for me the golden question. So thank
you. Do you have an answer? Yeah, I have, I think I have a significant answer. I don't think it's
complete, but I think it's important. And this is to step before the Cartesian revolution and
think about many different kinds of knowing. And this is now something that is prominent within
what's called 4e cognitive science, the kind of cognitive science I practice. And there's a lot
of converging evidence for, okay, these different ways of knowing. There's propositional knowing.
This is what we are most familiar with. In fact, it's almost, it's almost has a tyrannical status,
right? So this is knowing that something is the case, like the cats or mammals and it's stored
in semantic memory. And we have tests of coherence and correspondence and conviction, right?
There's procedural knowing. This is knowing how to do something.
This is, skills are not theories. They're not beliefs. They're not true or false. They engage
the world or they don't. And they are stored in a different kind of memory, procedural memory.
Semantic memory can be damaged without any damage to procedural memory. That's why, you know, you
have the prototypical story of somebody suffering Alzheimer's and they're losing all kinds of facts,
but they can still sit down and play the piano flawlessly. Same kind of argument.
There's perspectival knowing. This is knowing what it's like to be you here now in this situation,
in this state of mind, the whole field of your salience landscaping, what it's like to be you
here now. And you have a specific kind of memory around that episodic memory. And you have a different
sense, you have a different criterion of realness. So you can, you can get this by, well, my friend
Dan Chiapia and I, we studied the, the scientists using moving the rovers around, or you can take
a look at people who are doing VR. People talk about, you know, they want, they want to really
be in the game. That makes it real. They don't mean verisimilitude. You can get that, right?
Sense of being in the game with something like Tetris, which has, isn't like, it doesn't look
like the real world. And you can fail to have it in a video game that is, has a lot of verisimilitude.
It's something else. It's about, again, this, this kind of connectedness that we're talking about.
If I may interrupt, is that connected to the heart problem of consciousness,
the subject, the qualia, or is that a different, that kind of knowing is that different from the
qualia of consciousness? I think it has to do with, well, I make a distinction between the
adjuctival and the adverbial qualia. So I think it has to do with the adverbial qualia much more
with the, than with the adjuctival. So the adjuctival qualia are like the greenness of green and
the loonness of bloom. The adverbial qualia are the hereness, the nowness, the togetherness.
And I think the perspective of knowing has a lot to do with the adverbial qualia.
Adjuctival qualia and adverbial qualia. I'm learning so many new things today.
Okay. So that's another way of knowing. Right. The perspective. And then there's a deeper one.
And this is a philosophical point. I don't want to, we can go through the argument.
But you don't have to know that you know in order to know, because if you start doing that,
you get an infinite regress. There has to be kinds of knowing that doesn't mean you know that you
know that. Yeah. Okay. Of course. Okay. Great. Okay. Good. Well, there was a lot of ink spilled
over that over a 40-year period. So by philosophers, they spilled, this is what they do. They spill
ink. Yeah. But I want to talk about. I want to talk about what I call participatory knowing.
This is the idea that you and the world are co-participating in things and such that real
affordances exist between you. So both me and this environment are shaped by gravity. So the
affordance of walking becomes available to me. Both me and a lot of this environment are shaped
by my biology. And so affordances for that are here. Look at this cup. Shared physics.
Shared sort of biological factors. Look at my hand. I'm bipedal. Yeah. Also, culture is shaping
me and shaping this. I had to learn how to use that and treat it as a cup. So this is an agent
arena relationship, right? There's identities being created in your agency. Identities being
created in the world as an arena. So you and the world fit together. You know when that's missing
when you're really lonely or you're homesick or you're suffering culture shock. So this is
participatory knowing and it's the sense of, it comes with a sense of belonging.
At every level. So the ability to walk is a kind of knowing. Yes. Yes. Yes. That there's a dance
between the physics that enables this process and just participating in the process is the
act of knowing. Right. And there's a really weird form of memory you have for this kind
of knowing. It's called yourself. What? Can you elaborate? So we talked about how all the
different other kinds of knowing had specific kinds of memory, semantic memory for propositional
procedural, right? Episodic for perspectival. What's the kind of memory that is the coordinated
storehouse of all of your agent arena relationships, all the roles you can take,
all the identities you can assume, all the identities you can assign. What's the self?
Do you mean like consciousness or like? No, I mean your sense of self. Sense of self in this world
that's not consciousness. That's like an agency or something. Right. It's an agent arena relationship.
And so in an agent arena relationship, it's the sense of the agent.
And that the agent belongs in that arena. Whatever the agent is, whatever the arena is,
because it's probably a bunch of different framings of how you experience that.
Yeah. And you do. Within your identity as a self, you have all kinds of roles
that are somehow contributing to that identity, but are not equivalent to that identity.
Yeah. I wonder if like my two hands have different,
because there's a different experience of me picking up something with my right hand
and then my left hand. So are those like? That's a really cool question, Lex.
Are they certainly feel like their own things?
And that could be just anthropomorphization based on cultural narratives and so on.
It could, but I think it's a legitimate empirical question, because it also could be
sort of Ian McGilchrist stuff. It could be you're using different hemispheres
and they sort of have different agent arena relationships to the environment.
This is a really important question in the cognitive science of the self. Does that hemispheric
difference mean you're multiple or you actually have a singular self?
Oh, so it's important to understand how many cells are there.
Yes, I think so.
But that's just like a quirk of evolution. It surely can't be fundamental to cognition,
having multiple cells or a singular self.
It depends, again, because we're getting far from the answer to the question you originally asked
me. Do you want me to go back to that first or answer this one?
Which question? I already forgot everything.
What's the functionality of religion?
Yes, let us return.
Okay, and then we can return to the self. Okay, so you said you have all these propositions
and et cetera, et cetera, and they differ from the religions and they're not,
they don't seem to be considered legitimate by many people.
But yet there's something functioning in the religions that is transforming people
and making them wiser. I put it to you that the transformations are largely occurring at
those non-propositional levels, the procedural, the perspectival, and the participatory.
And those are the ones, by the way, that are more fundamentally connected to meaning making,
because remember, the propositions are representational and they're dependent on the
non-propositional, non-representational processes of connectedness and relevance
realization. So religion goes down deep to the non-propositional and works there.
That's the functionality we need to grasp.
Well, you talk about tools, essentially, that humans are able to incorporate into their cognition.
Psycho technologies, like language is one, I suppose.
Isn't religion then a psychotechnology?
It would be a, yeah, an ecology of psychotechnologies, yes.
And the question is that Nietzsche ruined everything by saying God is dead.
Do we have to invent the new thing? Go from the old phone, create the iPhone,
invent the new psychotechnology. It takes place of religion.
And so when the madman in Nietzsche's text goes into the marketplace, who's he talking to?
He's not talking to the believers. He's talking to the atheists. And he says,
do you not realize what we have done? We have taken a sponge and wiped away the sky.
We are now forever falling. We are unchained from the sun. We have to become worthy of this.
Yeah. Well, Nietzsche is full of romantic bullshit.
No, no, no. But there's a point there. The point is, right, there's one thing to
rejecting the proposition. There's another project of replacing the functionality that we lost
when we reject the religion.
So his worry that as nihilism takes hold, you don't ever replace the thing that religion,
the role that religion played in our world.
Maybe it's hard to tell what he actually, because he's so multi-vocal. I'll speak for me,
rather than for Nietzsche. I think it is possible to using the best cognitive science and respectfully
exapting what we can from the best religion and philosophical traditions, because there's
things like stoicism that are in the gray line between philosophy and religion. Buddhism is the
same. Doing that best cocci, that best exaptation, we can come up with that functionality without
having to buy into the particular propositional sets of the legacy religions. That's my proposal.
I call that the religion that's not a religion. So things like stoicism or modern stoicism,
those things, don't you think in some sense they naturally emerge? Don't you think there's a longing
for meaning? So stoicism arises during the Hellenistic period when there was a significant
meaning crisis in the ancient world because of what had happened after the breakup of Alexander
the Great's empire. So if you compare Aristotle to people who are living after Alexander, so
Aristotle grows up in a place where everybody speaks the same language, has the same religion,
his ancestors have been there for years, he knows everybody. After Alexander the Great's empire is
broken up, people are now thousands of miles away from the government. They're surrounded by people
because of the dysporas, the diasporas I should say. They're surrounded by people that don't speak
their language, don't share their religion. That's why you get all these mother religions emerging,
universal mother religions like ISIS, etc. So there is what's called domicite. There's the
killing of home. There's a loss of a sense of home and belonging and fittedness during the
Hellenistic period and stoicism arose specifically to address that. And because it was designed to
address a meaning crisis, it is no coincidence that it is coming back into prominence right now.
Well, there could be a lot of other variations and it feels like I think when you speak of the
meaning crisis, you're in part describing, not prescribing, you're describing something that
is happening. But I would venture to say that if we just leave things be, the meaning crisis
dissipates because we long to create institutions, to create collective ideas of this distributed
cognition process that give us meaning. So if religion loses power, we'll find other
institutions that are sources of meaning. Is that your intuition as well?
I think we are already doing that. I am involved with and do participant observation
of many of these emerging communities that are creating ecologies of practice that are
specifically about trying to address the meaning crisis. I just, in late July, I went to Washington
State and did Rafe Kelly's Evolve Move Play return to the source and wow, one of the most
challenging things I've ever done. That guy is awesome, by the way. I've gotten to interact with
him a long, long time ago. He said to say hi to you, by the way. Yeah, it's from another world.
I feel like a different world because I interacted with him, not directly. This is somebody,
maybe you can speak to what he works on, but he makes movement and play. He encourages people to
make that a part of their life. How you move about the world, whether that's as part of
sort of athletic endeavors or actually just walking around a city. I think the reason I ran
into him is because there was a lot of interest in that, in the athletic world, in the grappling
world, in the Brazilian jiu-jitsu world, people who study movement, who make movement part of
their lives to see how can we do great play and fun and just the basic humanness that's natural
to our movement. How do we integrate that into our daily practice? This is yet another way to find
meaning. I think it's actually an exemplar of what I was talking about because what's going on
with Rafe's integration of parkour in nature and martial arts and mindfulness practices
and dialogical practices is exactly and explicitly so, by the way. He will tell you he's been very
influenced by my work. He's trying to get at the non-propositional kinds of knowing that make meaning
by evolving our sensory motor loop and enhancing our relevance realization because that gives people
profound, improved sense of connectedness to themselves, to each other and the world. I'll
tell you, Lex, I don't want to say too specifically the final thing that people did because it's part
of his secret sauce. What I can say is when it was done, I said to them all, I said,
as far as I can tell, none of you are religious, right? And they go, yeah, yeah. But what you just
did was a religious act, wasn't it? And they all went, yeah, it was. Yeah. So that same magic was
there. Yes. Bathroom break? Sure. What's your take on atheism in general? Is it closer to truth
than maybe is an atheist closer to truth than a person who believes in God?
So I'm a non-theist, which means I think the shared set of presuppositions between the
theist and the atheist are actually what needs to be rejected.
Can you explain that further? Yes, I can. And I want to point out, by the way, that there
are lots of non-theistic religious traditions. So I'm not coming up with a sort of airy fairy
category. Yeah. And what's the difference in non-theism, agnosticism, and atheism?
So non-theists think that the theist and the atheist share a bunch of presuppositions. For
example, it's that sacredness is to be understood in terms of a personal being that is, in some
sense, the supreme being, and that the right relationship to that being is to have a correct
set of beliefs. I reject all of those claims. So both the theist and the atheist?
In their modern version. Yes. In which do you reject it in the sense that you don't know
or do you reject it in the sense that you believe that each one of those presuppositions is likely
to be not true? The latter. Both on reflection, argument, and personal experimentation and
experience, I've come to the conclusion that those shared propositions are probably not true.
Which one is the most troublesome to you? The personal being, the kind of accumulation of
everything into one being that ultimately created stuff? So for me, there's two and
they're interlocked together. I'm not trying to dodge your question. It's that the idea that
the ground of being is some kind of being, I think, is a fundamental mistake.
It's void of being? No, no, no. The ground of being is some kind of being.
No, no, no. The turtle's all the way down. The ground of being is not itself any kind of being.
Being is not a being. It is the ability for things to be, which is not the same thing as a being.
Are humans beings? We are beings. This glass is a being. This table is a being.
But when I ask you, how are they all in being, you don't say by being a glass,
or by being a table, or by being a human. You want to say, no, no, there's something underneath
it all. And then you realize it can't be anything. This is why many mystical traditions converge on
the idea that the ground of being is no thingness, which is normally pronounced as nothingness.
But if you put the hyphen back in, you get the original intent, no thingness.
And that is bound up with, okay, what I need to do in order to be in relationship with,
so it's a misconstruing of ultimate reality as a supreme being, which is a category mistake to my
mind, and then that my relationship to it, that sacredness is a function of belief.
And I have been presenting you an argument through most of our discussion that meaning
is at a deeper level than beliefs and propositions. And so that is a misunderstanding of sacredness,
because I take sacredness to be that which is most meaningful and connected to what is most real.
And theists think of what? Of sacredness as what?
They think of sacredness as a property of a particular being, God, and that the way that
is meaningful to them is by asserting a set of propositions or beliefs. Now, I want to point
out that this is what I would now call modern or common theism. You go back into the classical
periods of Christianity, you get a view that's really radically different from how most people
understand theism today. Okay, so let me, this is an interesting question that I usually think about
in the form of mathematics, but so in that case, if meaning is sacred in your nontheist view,
is meaning created or is it discovered? There's a Latin word that doesn't separate
them called inventio. And I would say that, and before you say, oh, well, give me a chance,
because you participate in it. You've experienced an insight, yes? Did you make it happen?
The insight? Did you make it happen? Or did you do, like, can you do that? I need an insight.
This is what I do to make an insight. Oh, I see. Yeah, in some sense, it came from elsewhere.
Right, but you didn't just passively receive it either. You're engaged and involved in it.
That's why you get, right? So that's what I mean by you participate in it. You participate in
meaning. So you do think that it's both? Yes. You do think it's both. I mean, that's not a trivial
thing to understand, because a lot of time we think, when you think about a search for meaning,
you think it's like you're going through a big house and you open each door and look if it's
there and so on, as if there is going to be a glowing orb that you discover. But at the same time,
I'm somebody that, based on the chemistry of my brain, have been extremely fortunate to be able
to discover beauty in everything in the most mundane and boring of things. I am, as David
Foster Wallace said, unboreable. I could just sit in a room, just like playing with a tennis ball
or something and be excited. Basically, like a dog, I think, endlessly. So to me, meaning is
created, because I could create meaning out of everything. But of course, it doesn't require a
partner. It does require dance partners, whatever. It does require the tennis ball. But honestly,
that's what a lot of people that I don't necessarily, we'll talk about. I don't practice
meditation, but people who meditate very seriously, like the entire days for months kind of thing.
They talk about being able to discover meaning in just the wind or something. The breath and
everything, just subtle sensory experiences give you deep fulfillment. So that's again,
this interaction. Actually, I do want to say because the interesting
difference that you've drawn between nontheism, theism and atheism,
where's the agreement or disagreement between you and Jordan Peterson on this? I just talked to
Jordan about this, because you're very clear. It's kind of beautiful in the clarity in which
you laid this out. I wonder if Jordan has arrived at a similar kind of clarity. Have you been able
to draw any kind of lies between the way the two of you see religion?
Yeah. So there was a video released, I think like two or three weeks ago, with Jordan and myself and
Jonathan Peugeot. Oh, I haven't watched that one yet. Yeah. And it's around this question, Lux.
He's basically sort of making, he's putting together an argument for God. I mean, I think
that's a fair way. I don't think he would object to me saying that. And Jonathan Peugeot is also
a, well, Jonathan is a Christian. It's unclear what Jordan is.
And Jonathan's work is on symbolism and different mythologies and Christianity.
Yes, especially Neoplatonic Christianity, which is very important. I have a lot of respect,
well, I have a lot of respect for both of them, but I have a lot of respect for Jonathan.
But in my participation in that dialogue, you can see me, well, repeatedly,
but I think everybody, including Jordan thought constructively, challenging sort of the attempt
to build a theistic model. And I was challenging it from a non-theistic perspective. So I think
we don't agree on certain sets of propositions, but there was a lot of, there was also a lot of
acknowledgement. And I think genuine appreciation on his part and Jonathan's part of the arguments I
was making. So they believe in maybe the presupposition of like a supreme being. Not believe,
but not believe, but they see the power of that particular presupposition in being a source of
meaning. I think that's relatively clear for me with Jordan. Jordan's a really complex guy,
so it's very hard to just like pin. To my best sort of understanding, yes, I think that's clearly
the case for Jordan. It's not the case for Jonathan. Jonathan is, remember I said,
I was talking about modern atheism and theism? Jonathan is a guy who somehow went into icon
carving and Maximus the Confessor and Eastern Orthodoxy and has come out of it the other end
as a fifth century church father that is nevertheless being rightfully so, to be increasingly relevant
to many people. So he's deeply old school. Yeah, I think he has, he and I, especially because
Neoplatonism is a non-theistic philosophical spirituality and it's a big part of Eastern
Orthodoxy, he and I, I think he would say things like, God doesn't exist. What? You're a Christian,
right? And then, and he's being quite, but he'll say, well, God doesn't exist the way the cup exists
or the table exists, the same kind of move I was making a few minutes ago. He'll say things like
that. He will emphasize the no-thingness of ultimate reality, the no-thingness of God,
because he is, he's from that version of Christianity, what you might call classical
theism. But classical theism looks a lot more like non-theism than it looks like modern theism.
That's so interesting. Yeah, that's really interesting. What about, is there a line to be
drawn between myth and religion in terms of its usefulness in man's search for meaning?
So here's where Jordan and I are much more, actually all three of us are in significant
agreement. I said this in my series, but I want to say it again here. Myths aren't stories about
things that happened in the deep past that are largely irrelevant. Myths are stories about perennial
or pertinent patterns that need to be brought into awareness. And they need to be brought into an
awareness not just or primarily at the propositional level, but at those non-propositional levels.
And I think that is what good mythos does. I prefer to use the Greek word because we've now
turned the English word into a synonym for a widely believed falsehood. And I don't think,
again, if you go back even to the church fathers, I'm not a Christian, I'm not advocating for
Christianity, but neither am I here to attack it. But when they talk about reading these stories,
they think the literal interpretation is the weakest and the least important. You move to the
allegorical or the symbolic to the moral, to the spiritual, the mystical, and that's where, right?
So they would say to you, oh, you know, but how is the story of Adam and Eve true for you
now? And I don't mean true for you in that relativistic sense, I mean, how is it pointing to
a pattern in your life right now? So there is some sense in which the telling of this mythos
becomes real in connecting to the patterns that kind of captivate the public today.
So you just keep telling the story. I mean, there's something about some of these stories,
they're just really good at being sticky to the patterns of each generation. And they'll stick
to different patterns throughout time. They're just sticky in powerful ways.
Yes. And so we keep returning back to them again and again and again. And it's important to see
that some of these stories are recursive. They're myths about one particular set of patterns.
They're myths about, right, not just the important pattern. Like you get Jordan's stuff about
there's heroes and myths are trying to make us understand the need for being heroic in our own
lives. One of the things I like to put in counterbalance that is the Greek also have myths of
hubris, right? The counterbalance, the heroic, right? But then there are myths that are not about
those deeply important patterns, but they're myths about religio itself, that the way we're,
religio means to bind, to connect, the way relevance realization connects us. And so the
point of the myth is not notice that pattern or notice that pattern and notice that pattern. It's
notice how all of these patterns are emerging. And what does that say about us and reality?
And those myths, I think, are genuinely profound.
And how much of the myths, how much of the power of those myths is about the dialogues? You talk
about this quite a bit. I think in the first conversation with Jordan, you guys, I'm not sure
you've gotten really into it. You scratched the surface a little bit. But the role of, as you say,
dialogue in distributed cognition. What is that? The thing we're doing right now, talking
with our mouth holes. What is that? And actually, can I ask you this question?
If aliens came to Earth and were observing humans, would they notice our
distributed cognition first or our individual cognition first? What is the most notable thing
about us humans? Is it our ability to individually do well in IQ tests or whatever?
Or puzzle solve? Or is it this thing we're doing together?
I think most of our problem solving is done in distributed cognition.
Like look around. You didn't make this equipment. You didn't build this place. You didn't invent
this language that we're both sharing, et cetera, et cetera. And now there's more specific and precise
experimental evidence coming out. Let's take a standard task that people,
reasoning task. I wanted to do the details. It's called the Wayson Selection Task.
And you give it to people, highly educated psychology students,
premier universities across the world. We've been doing it since the 60s. It's
replicates and replicates. And only 10% of the people get it right.
You put them in a group of four and you allow them to talk to each other.
The success rate goes to 80%. That's just one example of a phenomenon that's coming to the four.
By the way, do you know if a similar experiment has been done on a group of engineering students
for psychology students? Is there a major group differences in IQ between those two?
Just kidding. Let's move on. There is a lot of evidence that there's power to this
distributed cognition. Now, what about this mechanism, this fascinating mechanism
of the ants interacting with each other, the dialogue?
I use the word discourse or dialogue for just people having a conversation.
And this is deeply inspired by Socrates and Plato, especially the Platonic dialogues.
And I'm sure we've all had this. And so give me a moment because I want to build on to something here.
We've participated in conversations that took on a life of their own and took us both in
directions we did not anticipate, afforded us insights that we could not have had on our own.
And we don't have to have come to an agreement, but we were both moved and we both drawn into
insight and we feel like, wow, that was one of the best moments of my life because we feel
how that introduced us to a capacity for tapping into a flow state within distributed cognition
that puts us into a deeper relationship with ourselves, with another person, and potentially
with the world. That's what I mean by Deologos. And so for me, I think Deologos is
more important. Boy, I can just hear, I'm sorry, I can hear Jordan and Jonathan in my head right
now, but I think it's more... I hear them all the time. I just wish they would shut up in my head
sometimes. So what are they saying to you in your head? What they're saying, well, see,
that's what the most recent conversation was about. I was trying to say
that I don't think mythos is... I think mythos is really important. I think these kinds of narratives
are really important, but I think this ability to connect together in distributed cognition,
collective intelligence, and cultivate a shared flow state within that collective
intelligence so it starts to ramp up perhaps towards collective wisdom. I think that's
more important because I think that's the basin within which the myths and the rituals are
ultimately created and when they function. A myth is like a public dream. It depends
on distributed cognition and it depends on people enacting it and getting into mutual flow states.
So the highest form of dialogue of conversation is this flow state and that it forms the
foundation for myth building. I think so. I think so. So that communitas, that's Victor Turner's
phrase, specifically linked it to flow and I study flow scientifically, that within distributed
cognition as the home, as the generator of mythos and ritual and those are bound together as well,
I think that's fundamentally correct. You know what's the cool thing here? Because I'm a huge
fan of podcasts and audiobooks, but podcasts in particular is relevant here is there's a
third person in this room listening now and they're also in the flow state. Yes, yes. I'm close
friends with a lot of podcasts. They don't know I exist. I just listen to them because I've been
in so many flow states with them. I was like, yes, yes, this is good, but they don't know I exist,
but they are in conversation with me ultimately. And think of what that's doing. You've got dialogues
and then you've got this meta dialogue like you're describing and think about how things like podcasts
and YouTube, they break down old boundaries between the private and the public, between writing
and oral speech. So we have the dynamics of living oral speech, but it has the permanency
of writing. We're in the midst of creating a vehicle and a medium for distributed cognition
that breaks down a lot of the categories by which we organized our cognition.
I mean, because of the tools of YouTube and so on, just the network, the graph of how quickly
the distributed cognition can spread is really powerful. You just a huge amount of people have
listened to your lectures. I've listened to your lectures, but I've experienced them, at least in
your style, there's something about your style. It felt like a conversation. It felt like at
any point moment I could interrupt you and say something. And I was just listening.
Thank you for saying that because I aspire to being genuinely as Socratic as I can when I'm
doing this. Yeah, there was that sense actually as I'm saying it now. Why was that? It didn't feel
like sometimes lectures, you come down with the commandments and you just want to listen.
But there was a sense like, I mean, I think it was the excitement that you have to understand.
And also the fact that you were kind of, I think, thinking off the top of your head sometimes.
You were interrupting yourself with thoughts. You're playing with thoughts. You're reasoning
through things often. You referenced a lot of books, so surely you're extremely well prepared
and you're referencing a lot of ideas, but then you're also struggling in the way to present
those ideas. Yes. And so the jazz, the jazz and getting into the flow state and trying to
share in a participatory and perspectival fashion the learning with the people
rather than just pronouncing at them. Yes. What's mindfulness?
So published on that as well. And I practice. I've been practicing many forms of mindfulness
and ecology of practices since 1991. So I both have practitioners' knowledge and I also study
it scientifically. I think I'm pretty sure I was the first person to academically talk about
mindfulness at the University of Toronto within a classroom setting, like lecturing on it.
So this is a topic that a lot of people have recently become very interested in, think about.
So from that, from the early days, how do you think about what it is?
I've critiqued the sort of standard definitions being aware of the present moment without judgment
because I think they're flawed. And if you want to get into the detail of why we can,
but this is how I want to explain it to you. And it also points to the fact of why you need
an ecology of mindfulness practices. You shouldn't equate mindfulness with meditation. I think that's
a primary mistake. When you say ecology, what do you mean by the way? So lots of many different
variants? No, so what I mean by an ecology is exactly what you have in an ecology. You have a
dynamical system in which there are checks and balances on each other. And I'll get to that
with this about mindfulness. I'll make that connection if you allow me. So we're always
framing. We've been talking about that. And for those of you who are not on YouTube,
this podcast, I wear glasses and I'm now sort of putting my fingers and thumb around the
frames of my glasses. So this is my frame. And my lenses and that frame, the frame holds a lens
and I'm seeing through it in both senses, beyond and by means of it. So right now,
my glasses are transparent to me. I want to use that as a strong analogy for my mental framing.
Now, this is what you do in meditation, I would argue. You step back from looking through your
frame and you look at it. I'm taking my glasses off right now and I'm looking at them. Why might I
do that? To see if there's something in the lenses that is distorting, causing me to, right?
Now, if I just did that, that could be helpful, but how do I know if I've actually corrected
the change I made to my lenses? What do I need to do? I need to put my glasses on and see if I
can now see more clearly and deeply than I could before. Meditation is this, stepping back and
looking at. Contemplation is that looking through and there are different kinds of practices. The
fact that we treat them as synonyms is a deep mistake. The word contemplation has temple in it,
in Latin. Contemplario means to look up to the sky. It's a translation of the Greek word theoria,
which we get our word theory from. It's to look deeply into things. Meditation is more about
having to do with reflecting upon, standing back and looking at. Mindfulness includes both.
It includes your ability to break away from an inappropriate frame
and the ability to make a new frame. That's what actually happens in insight. You have to both break
an inappropriate frame and make, see, realize a new frame. This is why mindfulness enhances insight.
Both ways, by the way. Meditative practices and also contemplative practices.
So, mindfulness is frame awareness that can be appropriated in order to improve your
capacities for insight and self-regulation. Now, I am inexperienced with meditation,
the rigorous practice and the science of meditation. I've talked to people who
seriously as a science study psychedelics, and they often talk about the really important thing
is the integration back, so the contemplation step. It's not just the actual things you see
on psychedelics or the actual journey of where your mind goes on psychedelics. It's also the
integrating that into the new perspective that you take on life. You really nicely describe
so meditation in that metaphor is the psychedelic journey to a different mind state. Contemplation
is the return back to reality, how you integrate that into a new world view. Mindfulness is the
whole process. So, if you just did contemplation, you could suffer from inflation and projective
fantasy. If you just do meditation, you can suffer from withdrawal, spiritual bypassing,
avoiding reality. They act. They need each other. You have to cycle between them. It's like
what I talked about earlier when I talked about the opponent processing within the autonomic
nervous system or the opponent processing at work and attention, and that's what I mean by an
ecology of practices. You need both. Neither one is a panacea. You need them in this opponent
processing acting as checks and balance on each other. Is there sort of practical advice you can
give to people on how to meditate or how to be mindful in this full way? Yes. I would tell them
to do at least three things, and I was, I lucked into this. When I started meditation, I went down
the street and there was a place that taught vipassana meditation, metacontemplation and tai chi
chuan for flow induction, and you should get, you should have a meditative practice.
You should find a contemplative practice, and you should find a moving mindfulness practice,
especially one that is conducive to the flow state and practice them in an integrated fashion.
Can you elaborate what those practices might look like? Generally speaking.
Meditative practice like vipassana. What's the primary thing I look through rather than look
at? It's my sensations. What I'm going to do is I'm going to focus on my sensations rather than
focusing on the world through my sensations. I'm going to follow, for example, the sensations in
this area of my abdomen, where my breathing is. I can feel as my abdomen is expanding,
I can feel those sensations, and then I can feel the sensations as it's contracting.
What will happen is my mind will leap back to try to look through and look at the world again.
I'll start thinking about, I need to do my laundry, or what was that noise? What do I do?
I don't get involved with the content. I step back and label the process with an
ING word, listening, imagining, planning, and then I return my attention to the breath. I have to
return my attention in the correct way. Part of your mind that jumps around in the Buddhist
tradition, this is called your monkey mind. It's like a monkey leaping for branches and chattering.
If I was trying to train that monkey mind to stay, or as Jack Hornfield said, train a puppy dog,
stay puppy dog, and if it goes and I get really angry, and I bring it back and I'm yelling at it,
I'm going to train it to fight and fear me. But if I just indulge it, if I just feed its
whims, oh, look, the puppy dog went there. Oh, now it's there. The puppy dog never learns to stay.
What do I need to do? I have to neither fight it nor feed it. I have to have this centered
attitude. I have to befriend it. You step back and look at your sensations. You step back and look
at your distracting processes. You return your attention to the breath and you do it with the
right attitude. That's the core of a good meditative practice.
Okay, then what's a good contemplative practice?
A good contemplative practice is to try and meta. It's actually apropos, because we talked about
that participatory knowing the way you're situated in the world. This is a long thing,
because there's different interpretations of meta. I go for what's called an existential
interpretation over an emotional one. What I'm doing in meta is I'm trying to
awaken in two ways. I'm trying to awaken to the fact that I am constantly assuming an identity
and assigning an identity. I'm looking at that. I'm trying to awaken to that. Then I'm trying
to awake from the modal confusion that I can get into around that. I'm looking out onto the world
and I'm trying to see you in a fundamentally different way than I have before.
You go to the gym and you do bicep curls. Yes, yes.
Is it possible to reduce it to those things? I mean, you don't need to speak to the specifics,
but is there actual practice you can do or is it really personal?
No, I teach people how to do the meta practice. I also teach them how to do a neoplatonic
contemplative practice, how to do a stoic. Another one you can do is the view from above.
This is classic stoicism. I get you to imagine that you're in this room and then imagine that
you're floating above the room, then above Austin, then above Texas, then above the United States,
then the earth. You have to really imagine it. Don't just think it, but really imagine it.
What you notice is as you're pulling out to a wider and wider contemplation of reality,
your sense of self and what you find relevant and important also changes. For all of these,
there is a specific step-by-step methodology. In that one, you could just literally imagine
yourself floating farther and farther out. You have to go through the steps because the
stepping matters because if you just jump, it doesn't work.
Do you have any of the stuff online, by the way?
I do because during COVID, I decided at the advice of a good friend to do a daily course.
I taught meditating with John Rovaki. I did all the way through meditation,
contemplation, even some of the movement practices. That's all there. It's all available.
That was largely inspired by Buddhism and Taoism. Then I went into the Western tradition and went
through things like stoicism and neoplatonism, cultivating wisdom with John Rovaki. That's
all there. All free. On your website. Yeah, it's on my YouTube channel.
On your YouTube channel? Okay. That's exciting. I mean, your meaning crisis lectures are just
incredible. Everything around it, including the notes and the notes that people talk.
It created this tree of conversations that's really, really, really well done.
What about flow induction? You want to flow wisely. First of all,
you need to understand what flow is, and then you need to confront a particular
issue around a practical problem around flow. Let's go there because a lot of those words
seem like synonyms to people sometimes. The state of flow, what is it?
All right. He just died last year. Chik Samp Mahai.
I admire him very much. We've exchanged a bunch of messages over the past few years.
He wanted to do the podcast several times. That would have been wonderful.
But he said he struggled with his health. I never knew in those situations. I deeply regret
several cases like this that I had with Conway that I should have pushed him on it.
Because, yeah, as you get later in life, the simple things become more difficult,
but a voice, especially one that hasn't been really heard, is important to hear.
Anyway, I apologize. I share that. I can tell you that within
my area, he is important, and he's famous in an academics sense. The flow state,
two important sets of conditions, and very often people only talk about one, and that's
a little bit of a misrepresentation. The flow state is in situations in which
the demand of the situation is slightly beyond your skills. You both have to apply all the
skills you can with as much attention and concentration as you possibly can, and you
have to actually be stretching your skills. In this circumstance, people report optimal
experience, optimal in two ways, optimal in that this is one of the best experiences I've
had in my life. It's distinct from pleasure, and yet it explains why people do very bizarre
things like rock climbing because it's a good flow induction. But they also mean optimal in a
second sense, my best performance. It's both the best experience and the best performance.
Chicksat Mahay also talked about the information flow conditions you need
in order for there to be this state of flow, and then I'll talk about what it's like to be in
flow in a sec. What you need is three things. You need the information that you're getting
to be clear. It can't be ambiguous or vague. Think about a rock climber. It's ambiguous and vague.
There has to be tightly coupled feedback between what you do and how the environment responds.
So when you act, there's an immediate response. There isn't a big time lag
between your action and your ability to detect the response from the environment.
Third, failure has to matter. Error really matters.
So there should be some anxiety about failure. And failure matters.
Like to you, the person that persists. Yes, yes, yes. Now when you're in the flow state,
and notice how this sits on the boundary between the secular and the sacred,
when you're in the flow state, people report a tremendous sense of at one mit with the environment.
They report a loss of a particular kind of self-consciousness, that narrative,
nurturing nanny in your head that, how do I look? Do people like me? How do I look?
How's my hair? Do people like me? Should I have said that? That all goes away.
You're free from that. You're free from the most sadistic, super ego self-critic you could
possibly have, at least for a while. The world is vivid. It's super salient to you. There's
an ongoing sense of discovery. Although often you know you're exerting a lot of
metabolical effort, it feels effortless. So in the flow state when you're sparring,
your hand just goes up for the block, and your strike just goes through the empty space.
Or if you're a goalie in hockey, I've got to mention hockey once I'm a Canadian,
right? You put out your glove hand in the pucks there, right? So there's this tremendous sense
of grace, atonement, super salience, discovery, and realness. People don't, well, people don't,
when they're in the flow state, they don't go, I bet this is an illusion.
The interesting question for me and my co-authors in the book, in the article we published,
in the Oxford Handbook, A Spontaneous Thought with Arian, Harry Bennett, and Leo Ferraro,
is that's a descriptive account of flow. We wanted an explanatory account, one of the causal
mechanisms at work in flow. And so we actually proposed two interlocking cognitive processes.
The first thing we said is, well, what's going on in flow? Well, think about it. Think about the
rock climber. The rock climber, and I talked about this earlier, they're constantly restructuring
how they're seeing the rock face. They're constantly doing something like insight.
And if they fail to do it, they impasse, and that starts to get dangerous. So they got to do it
in insight, that primes in insight, that primes in insight. So imagine the aha experience,
that flash in that moment, and imagine it cascading, so you're getting the extended aha.
That's why things are super salient. There's a sense of discovery. There's a sense of atonement,
of deep participation, of grace. But there's something else going on too.
So there's a phenomena called implicit learning. Also, very well replicated,
starts way back in the 60s with Reber. You can give people complex patterns, like number and
letter strings, right? And they can learn about those patterns outside of deliberate
focal awareness. That's what's called implicit learning. And what's interesting is if you try
and change that task into, you know, tell me the pattern, but explicitly try to figure out
the performance degrades. So here's the idea. You have this adaptive capacity for implicit
learning. And what it does is it results in you being able to track complex variables in a way,
but you don't know how you came up with that knowledge. And this is Hogarth's proposal in
educating intuition. Intuition is actually the result of implicit learning. So an example I use
is, how far do you stand away from somebody at a funeral? There's a lot of complex variables.
There's status, closeness to the person, your relationship to them, past history,
all kinds of stuff. And yet you know how to do it. And you didn't have to go to funeral school.
I'm just using that as an example. So you have these powerful intuitions. Now here's Hogarth's
great point. Implicit learning, and remember I said before, the things that make it adaptive make
a subject to self-deception. Here's another example. Implicit learning is powerful at picking up on
complex patterns, but it doesn't care what kind of pattern it is. It doesn't distinguish causal
patterns from merely correlational patterns. So when we like it, it's intuition. When it's picking
up on stuff that's bogus, we call it prejudice, or all kinds of other names for intuition that's
going wrong. Now he said, okay, what do we do? What do we do about this? And this will get back to
flow. What do we do about this? Well, we can't try to replace implicit learning with explicit
learning because we'll lose all the adaptiveness to it. So what can we do explicitly? What we can
do is take care of the environment in which we're doing the implicit learning. How do we do that?
We try to make sure the environment has features that help us distinguish causation from correlation.
What kind of environments have we created that are good at distinguishing causation from correlation?
Experimental environments. What do you do in an experiment? You make sure that the variables
are clear. No confound, no ambiguity, no vagueness. You make sure there's a tight coupling between
the independent and the dependent variable, and your hypothesis can be falsified. Error
matters. Now look at those three legs. Those are exactly the three conditions that you need for
flow. Clear information, tightly coupled feedback, and error matters. So flow is not only an
insight cascade, improving your insight capacity. It's also a marker that you're cultivating the
best kind of intuitions, the ones that fit you best to the causal patterns in your environment.
But it's hard to achieve that kind of environment where there's a clear distinction between
causality and correlation, and it has the rigor of a scientific experiment.
Fair enough. And I don't think Hogarth was saying it's going to be epistemically as rigorous as a
scientific experiment. But he's saying, if you structure that, it will tend to do what that
scientific method does, which is find causal. Think of the rock climber. All of those things are
the case. They need clear information. It's tightly coupled, and error matters. And they think what
they're doing is very real, because if they're not conforming to the real causal patterns of the
rock face and the physiology of their body, they will fall. Is there something to be said about
the power of discovering meaning and having this deep relationship with the moment?
There's something about flow that really forgets the past and the future, and is really focused on
the moment. I think that's part of the phenomenology. But I think the functionality has to do with the
fact that what's happening in flow is that dynamic non-propositional connectedness that is so central
to meaning is being optimized. This is why flow is a good predictor of how well you rate your life,
how much well-being you think you have, which of course is itself also predictive and interrelated
with how meaningful you find your life. One of the things that you can do, but there's an important
caveat, to increase your sense of meaning in life is to get into the flow state more frequently.
That's why I said you want a moving practice that's conducive to the flow state. But there's one
important caveat, which is we of course have figured out, and I'm playing with words here,
how to game this and how to hijack it by creating things like video games. I'm not saying this is
the case for all video games or this is the case for all people, but the WHO now acknowledges this
as a real thing that you can get into the flow state within the video game world to the detriment
of your ability to get into the flow state in the real world. What's the opposite of flow?
Depression. In fact, depression has been called anti-flow.
You get these people that are flowing in this non-real world, and they can't transfer it to the
real world, and it's actually costing them flow in the real world. They tend to suffer depression
and all kinds of things. Your ability, your habit, and just skill at attaining flow in the
video game world basically makes you less effective or maybe shocks you at how difficult
it is to achieve flow in the physical world. I don't want to push back against the implied
challenge of transferability because I have a lot of friends that play video games,
a very large percent of young folks play video games. I'm hesitant to build up models
of how that affects behavior. My intuition is weak there. Oftentimes, people that have
PhDs are of a certain age that they came up when video games weren't a deep part of their life
development. I would venture to say people who have developed their brain with video games being
a large part of that world are in some sense different humans, and it's possible that they
can transfer more effectively some of the lessons, some of the ability to attain flow from the
virtual world to the physical world. They're also more, I would venture to say, resilient
to the negative effects of, for example, social media or video games they have that may be the
objectification or the over sexualized or violent aspect of video games. They're able to
turn that off when they go to the physical world and turn it back on when they're playing
the video games probably more effectively than the old timers. I just want to say that I'm not
sure it's a really interesting question how transferable the flow state is. If you want to
comment on that. I do. First of all, I did qualify and I'm saying it's not the case for all video
games or for all people. I'm holding out the possibility and I know this possibility because
I've had students who actually suffer from this and have done work around it with me.
Oh, the ability to achieve. They couldn't transfer, yeah.
And then they were able to step back from that and then take up the cognitive science
and write about it and work on it. Also, I'm not so sure about the resiliency claim
because there seems to be mounting evidence. It's not consensus, but it's certainly not
regarded as fringe that the increase in social media is pretty strongly correlated with increase
in depression, self-destructive behavior, things like this. I would like to see that evidence.
No, no, no. Let me.
I'm always hesitant to too eagerly kind of agree with things that I want to agree with.
There's a public perception. Everyone seems to hate on social media. I wonder, as always with
these things, does it reveal depression or does it create depression? Sure. This is always the
question. It's like whenever you talk about any political or ideological movement, does it create
hate or does it reveal hate? And that's a good thing to ask and you should always challenge the
things that you intuitively want to believe. I agree with that. Like aliens. So one of the ways
you address this, and it's not sufficient, and I did say the work is preliminary, but if I can
give you a plausible mechanism that's new and then that lends credence and part of what happens
is a losery social comparison. Think of Instagram. People are posting things that are not accurate
representation of their life or life events. In fact, they will stage things, but the people
that are looking at these, they take it often as real and so they get downward social comparison.
Compared to how you and I probably live, where we may get one or two of those events
a week, they're getting them moment by moment and so it's a plausible mechanism that why it might
be driving people into a more depressed state. The flip side of that is because there's a greater
gap going from real world to Instagram world. You start to be able to laugh at it and realize
that it's artificial. So for example, even just artificial filters, people start to realize like
there's like, it's the same kind of gap as there is between the video game world and the real world.
In the video game world, you can do all kinds of wild things,
grant that thought or you can shoot people up, you can do whatever the heck you want,
in the real world you can't and you start to develop an understanding of how to have fun in
the virtual world and in the physical world. And I think it's just a pushback. I'm not saying
either is true though. Those are very interesting claims. The more ridiculously out of touch Instagram
becomes the easier you can laugh it off potentially in terms of the effect it has on your psyche.
I'll respond to that, but at some point we should get back to flow.
As we engage in flow.
You laugh at the shampoo commercial and you buy the shampoo.
Yeah.
There's a capacity for tremendous bullshitting because of the way these machines are designed
to trigger salience without triggering reflective truth seeking.
I'm thinking of common examples because sometimes you're
can laugh all the way to the bank. So you can laugh and not buy the shampoo.
Right.
There's many cases. So I think you have to laugh hard enough.
You do have to laugh hard enough, but the advertisers get millions of dollars
precisely because for many, many people it does make you buy the shampoo and that's the concern.
And maybe the machine of social media is such that it optimizes the shampoo buying.
Yes. The point I was trying to make is whether or not that particular example is ultimately right,
the possibility of transfer failure is a real thing. And I want to contrast that to an experience
I had when I was in grad school. I've been doing Tai Chi Chuan about three or four years
very religiously in both senses of the word, like three or four hours a day and reading all
the literature and I was having all the weird experiences, cold as ice, hot as lava, all that
stuff. But my friends in grad school, they said to me, what's going on? You're different.
And I said, what do you mean? And they said, well, you're a lot more balanced in your interactions
and you're a lot more flowing and you're a lot more sort of flexible and you adjust more.
And I realized, oh, you know, and this was the sort of Taoist claim around Tai Chi Chuan
that it actually transfers in ways that you might not expect. You start to be able,
and I've now noticed that. I now notice how I'm doing Tai Chi even in this interaction
and how it can facilitate and afford. And so there's a powerful transfer. And that's what I
meant by flow wisely, not only flow in a way that's making sure that your distinguishing
causation from correlation, which flow can do, but find how to situate it, home it,
so that it will percolate through your psyche and permeate through many domains of your life.
Is there something you could say similar to our discussion about mindfulness and meditation
and contemplation about the world that psychedelics take our mind? Where does the mind go
when it's on psychedelics? I want to remind you of something you said which is a gem.
It's not so much the experience, but the degree to which it can be integrated back.
So here's a proposal. It comes from Woodward and others. A lot of converges around this.
Carrot Harris is talking about it similarly in the entropic brain. But I'm not going to talk
first about psychedelics. I'm going to talk about neural networks. And I'm going to talk about
a classic problem in neural networks. So neural networks like us with intuition and implicit
learning are fantastic at picking up on complex patterns. Which neural networks are we talking
about? I'm talking about a general part. Both artificial and biological? Yes. Yes. Yes. I think
at this point there is no relevant difference. So one of the classic problems, because of their
power, is they suffer from overfitting to the data. Or for those of you with statistical orientation,
they pick up patterns in the sample that aren't actually present in the population.
And so what you do, there's various strategies. You can do dropout. You periodically turn off
half of the nodes in a network. You can drop noise into the network. And what that does is
it prevents overfitting to the data and allows the network to generalize more powerfully to the
environment. I proposed to you that that's basically what psychedelics do. They do that.
They basically do significant constraint reduction. And so you get areas of the brain
talking to each other that don't normally talk to each other. Areas that do talk to each other,
not talking to each other, down regulation of areas that are very dominant, like the default
mode network, et cetera. And what that does is exactly something strongly analogous, sorry,
to what's happening in dropout or putting noise into the data. It opens up. By the way,
if you give people, if you give human beings an insight problem that they're trying to solve
and you throw in some noise, like literally static on the screen, you can trigger an insight in them.
So like literally a very simplistic kind of noise to the perception system.
It can break it out of overfitting to the data and open you up. Now, that means though
that just doing that in and of itself is not the answer because you also have to make sure
that the system can go back to exploring that new space properly. This isn't a problem with
neural networks. You turn off dropout and they just go back to being powerful neural networks.
And now they explore the state space that they couldn't explore before.
Human beings are a little bit more messy around this and this is where the analogy does get a
little bit strained. So they need practices that help them integrate that opening up to the new
state space so they can properly integrate it. So beyond Leary's state set and setting,
I think you need another S. I think you need sacred. Psychedelics need to be practiced
within a sapiential framework, a framework in which people are independently and beforehand
improving their abilities to deal with self-deception and afford insight and self-regulate. This is,
of course, the overwhelming way in which psychedelics are used by indigenous cultures.
And I think if we put them into that context, then they can help the project of people
self-transcending, cultivating, meaning, and increasing wisdom. But I think we remove them
out of that context and put them in the context of commodities taken just to have
certain phenomenological changes. We run certain important risks.
So using the term of higher states of consciousness, is consciousness an important
part of that word? Why higher? Is it a higher state or is it a detour, a side road on the main
road of consciousness? Where do we go here? I think the psychedelic state is on a continuum.
There's insight, and then if flow is an insight cascade, there's flow, and then you can have
sort of psychedelic experiences, mind-revealing experiences, but they overlap with mystical
experiences, and they aren't the same. So, for example, in the Griffiths lab, they gave people
psilocybin, and they taught them ahead of time how sort of the features of a mystical experience,
and only a certain proportion of the people that took the psilocybin went from a psychedelic
into a mystical experience. What was interesting is the people that had the mystical experience
had measurable and long-standing change to one of the big five factors of personality.
They had increased openness. Openness is supposed to actually go down over time,
and these traits aren't supposed to be that malleable, and it was significantly altered.
But imagine if you just created more openness in a person, and they're now open to a lot more,
and they want to explore a lot more, but you don't give them the tools of discernment,
that could be problematic for them in important ways. That could be very problematic.
Yes, I got it. So, you have to land the plane in a productive way somehow, integrated back into
your life and how you see the world and how you frame your perception of that world.
And when people do that, that's when I call it a transformative experience.
Now, the higher states of consciousness are really interesting because they tend to move
people from a mystical experience into a transformative experience. Because what happens
in these experiences is something really, really interesting. They get to a state that's ineffable,
they can't put it into words, they can't describe it, but they do this, they're in this state
temporarily, and then they come back and they do this. They say, that was really real, and this
in comparison is less real. So, I remember that platonic meta-desire, I want to change my life
myself so that I'm more in conformity with that really real. And that is really odd, Lex, because
normally when we go outside of our consensus intelligibility, like a dream state, when we
come back from it, we say, that doesn't fit into everything, therefore, it's unreal. They do the
exact opposite. They come out of these states and they say, that doesn't fit into this, right?
Consensus intelligibility, and that means this is less real. They do the exact opposite,
and that fascinates me. Why do they flip our normal procedure about evaluating alternative
states? And the thing is, those higher states of consciousness, precisely because they have that
ontonormativity, the realness that demands that you make a change in your life, they serve to
bridge between mystical experiences and genuine transformative experiences.
So, you do think seeing those as more real is productive because then you reach for them?
So, Jaden's done work on it. Again, all of this stuff isn't recent, so we have to take it with
a grain of salt, but by a lot of objective measure, people who do this, who have these
higher states of consciousness and undertake the transformative process, their lives get better,
their relationships improve, their sense of self improves, their anxieties go down, depression,
like all of these other measures, the needles are moved on these measures by people undergoing
this transformative experience. Their lives, by many of the criteria that we judge our lives to
be good, get better. I have to ask you about this fascinating distributed cognition process that
leads to mass formation of ideologies that have had an impact on our world. So, you spoke about
the clash of the two great pseudo-religious ideologies of Marxism and Nazism, especially their
clash on the Eastern Front. Can you explain the origin of each of these? Marxism and Nazism
in a kind of way that we have been talking about the formation of ideas.
Hegel is to Protestantism what Thomas Aquinas is to Catholicism. He was the philosopher who took
German Protestantism and also Kant and Fichte and Schelling, and he built
a philosophical system. He explicitly said this, by the way. He wanted to bridge
between philosophy and religion. He explicitly said that. I'm not voicing that on him. He said it
repeatedly in many different places. So, he's trying to create a philosophical system that
gathered to it, I think, the core mythos of Christianity. The core mythos of Christianity
is this idea of a narrative structure to reality in which progress is real,
in which our actions now can change the future. We can co-participate with God
in the creation of the future, and that future can be better. It can reach something like a
utopia or the promised land or whatever. He created a philosophical system of brilliance,
by the way. He's a genius, but basically what it did was it took that religious vision
and gave it the air of philosophical intelligibility and respect.
Then Marx takes that and says, you know that process by which the narrative is working itself
out that Hegel called dialectic? I don't think it's primarily happening in ideas. I think it's
happening primarily in between classes within socioeconomic factors, but it's the same story.
Here's this mechanism of history. It's teleological. It's going to move this way. It can move towards
a utopia. We can either participate in furthering it, like participating in the work of God,
or we can thwart it and be against it. You have a pseudo-religious vision. It's all
encompassing. Think about how Marxism is not just a philosophical position. It's not just
an economic position. It's an entire worldview, an entire account of history and a demanding
account of what human excellence is. It has all these things about participating, belonging,
fitting to. In Marx's case, it's very pragmatic or directly applicable to society
to where it more naturally leads to political ideologies.
It does, but I think Marx to a very significant degree inherits one of Hegel's main flaws.
Hegel is talking about all this, and he's trying to fit it into post-Contian philosophy. For him,
it's ultimately propositional, conceptual. He, like everybody after Descartes, is very focused
on the propositional level, and he's not paying deep attention to the non-propositional. This
is why the two great critics of Hegel, Nietzsche and Kierkegaard, they're trying to put their finger
on the non-propositional, the non-conceptual, the will to power or faith in Kierkegaard,
and they're trying to bring out all these other kinds of knowing as being inadequate.
That's why Kierkegaard met when he said, Hegel made a system and then he sat down beside it.
Right. Marxism is very much, it is activist. It's about reorganizing society, but the
transformation in individuals is largely ideological, meaning it's largely about
these significant propositional changes and adopting a set of beliefs.
When it came in contact with the Soviet Union or with what became the Soviet Union, why do you
think it had such a powerful hold on such a large number of people? Not Marxism, but implementation
of Marxism in the name of communism. Because it offered people, I mean, it offered people
something that typically only religions had offered, and it offered people the hope of making a new
man, a new kind of human being in a new world. And when you've been living in Russia,
in which things seem to be locked in a system that is crushing most people,
getting the promise in the air of scientific legitimacy that we can make new human beings
and a new world and in which happiness will ensue. That's an intoxicating proposal.
You get all of the intoxication of religious utopia, but you get all the seeming legitimacy
of claiming that it's a scientific understanding of history and economics.
It's very popular to criticize communism, Marxism these days. And I often put myself in the place
before any of the implementations came to be, I tried to think if I would be able to predict
what the implementations of Marxism and communism would result in in the 20th century.
And I'm not sure I'm smart enough to make that prediction, because at the core of the ideas are
respecting, with Marx, it's very economics type theory. So it's basically respecting the value
of the worker and the regular man in society for making a contribution to that society.
And to me, that seems like a powerful idea. And it's not clear to me how it goes wrong.
In fact, it's still not clear to me why the hell did this like with Stalin happen
or Mao happen. It's there's something very interesting and complex about human nature
in hierarchies about distributed cognition that results in that. And it's not trivial to understand.
No, no. So I mean, I wonder if you can put a finger on it. Why like why did it go so wrong?
So I think, you know, what Ohana talks about in the intellectual history of modernity
talks about the Promethean spirit, the idea, the really radical proposal and think about how it's
not so radical to us. And in that sense, Marxism has succeeded the radical proposal that you see
even in the French Revolution, and don't forget the terror comes in the French Revolution too,
that we can make ourselves into Godlike beings. Think of the hubris in that.
Right. And think of the overconfidence to think that we so understand human nature and all of
its complexities and human history, right, and how religion functioned and every that we can just
come in with a plan and make it run. It's to my mind, that Promethean spirit is part of why
it's doomed to fail. And it's doomed to fail in a kind of terrorizing way, because the Promethean
spirit really licenses you to do anything because the ends justify the means.
This the end justify the means really free you to do some of basically,
well, commit atrocities at any scale.
Ground zero with Pol Pot and the Cameroosh, right? Exactly. And you only, you can only believe
in an ends that can justify any means if you believe in a utopia, and you can only believe
in the utopia if you really buy into the Promethean spirit.
So is that what explains Nazism?
So Nazism is part of that too, the Promethean spirit that we can make ourselves into
Superman, Ubermench, right? And Nazism is fueled very much by appropriating and twisting
sort of Gnostic themes that are very prevalent. Gnosticism tends to come to the fore when people
are experiencing, you know, increased meaning crisis. And don't forget, the Weimar Republic is like,
a meaning crisis gone crazy on all levels. Everybody's suffering domicite. Everybody's
home and way of life and identity and culture and relationship to religion and science. All of that,
right? And so Nazism comes along and offers a kind of Gnosticism, again, twisted, perverted.
I'm not saying all nots, I'm not, not saying that all Gnostics are Nazis, but there is this Gnostic
mythology, mythos, and it comes to the fore. I remember, and this stuck with me,
undergrad, I was taking political science, and the professor extended lecture on this,
and it still rings true for me, says, if you understand Nazism as just a political movement,
you have misunderstood it. It is much more a religious phenomena in many ways.
Is it religious in that the loss of religion? So is it a meaning crisis? Or is it out of a
meaning crisis, every discovery of religion in a Promethean type of...
I think it's the latter. I think there's this vacuum created.
In that context is Hitler, the central religious figure.
Yes.
And also, did Nazi Germany create Hitler, or did Hitler create Nazi Germany? So in this
distributed cognition, where everyone's having a dialogue, what's the role of the charismatic
leader? Is it an emergent phenomena, or do you need one of those to kind of guide the populace?
I hope it's not a necessary requirement. I hope that the next Buddha can be the Sangha,
rather than a specific individual. But I think in that situation,
Hitler's charisma allowed him to take on a mythological, in the proper sense, archetypal.
He became deeply symbolic, and he instituted all kinds of rituals,
all kinds of rituals, and all kinds of mythos. There's all this mythos about the master race,
and there's all these rituals. The swastika is, of course, itself a religious symbol.
There's all of this going on because he was tapping into the fact that when you put people
into deeper and deeper meaning scarcity, they will fall back on more and more mythological ways
of thinking in order to try and come up with a generative source to give them new meaning-making,
I should say, meaning-participating behavior.
What is evil? Is this a word you avoid?
No, I don't, because I think part of what we're wrestling with here is resisting the enlightenment,
I mean the historical period in Europe, the idea that evil and sin can just be reduced to
immorality, individual human immorality. I think there's something deeper in the idea of sin than
just immoral. I think sin is a much more comprehensive category. I think sin is a failure to love
wisely so that you ultimately engage in a kind of idolatry. You take something as ultimate,
which is not, and that can tend to constolate these collective agents, I call them hyperagents,
within distributed cognition, that have a capacity to wreak havoc on the world that is not just due
to a sum total of immoral decisions. This goes to Hannah Arendt's thing, and the banality of
Eichmann, and she was really wrestling with it. I think she's close to something, but I think she's
slightly off. Eichmann is just making a whole bunch of immoral decisions, but it doesn't seem to
capture the gravity of what the Nazis did, the genocide and the warfare. She's right,
because you're not going to get just the summation of a lot of individual, rather banal, immoral choices
adding up to what was going on. You're getting a comprehensive parasitic process within massive
distributed cognition that has the power to confront the world and confront aspects of the
world that individuals can't. I think when we're talking about evil, that's what we're trying to
point to. This is a point of convergence between me and Jonathan Peugeot. We've been talking about
this. The word sin is interesting. Are you comfortable using the word sin? Because it's so
deeply rooted in the religious text. It is. In part, and I struggle around this
because I was brought up as a fundamentalist Christian, and so that is still there within
me. There's trauma associated with that. Probably layers of self-deception mechanisms.
No doubt. No doubt. You're slowly escaping. Trying to, and trying to come into a proper,
respectful relationship with Christianity via a detour through Buddhism, Taoism,
and pagan Neoplatonism. Trying to find a way how to love wisely.
Yes, exactly. I think the term sin is good because somebody may not be doing something
that we would prototypically call immoral, but if they're failing to love wisely,
they are disconnecting themselves in some important way from the structures of reality.
I think it was Hume. I may be wrong. Hume says, people don't do things because they think it's
wrong. They do a lesser good in place of a greater good. That's a different thing than
being immoral. We're saying, you're doing something that's wrong. It's like, well, no, no.
I'm loving my wife. That's a great thing, isn't it? But if you love your wife at the expense of
your kids, maybe something's going awry here. Well, I love my country. Great. But should you
love your country at the expense of your commitment to the religion you belong to? People should
wrestle with these questions, and I think sin is a failure to wrestle with these questions
properly. To be content with the choices you've made without considering,
is there a greater good that could be done? Your lecture series on the meaning crisis
puts us in dialogue in the same way as with the podcast, with a bunch of fascinating
thinkers throughout history, Heidegger, Corbyn, the man Carl Jung, Tillage, Barfield.
Is there, can you describe, this might be challenging, but one powerful idea from each
that jumps the mind, maybe Heidegger. So for Heidegger, one real powerful idea that has had
a huge influence on me. He's had a huge influence on me in many ways. He's a big influence on what's
called 4e cognitive science. And this whole idea about the non-propositional, that was deeply
afforded by Heidegger and Marla Ponti. But I guess maybe the one idea, if I had to pick one,
is his critique of ontotheology, his critique of the attempt to understand being in terms of a
supreme being, something like that, and how that gets us fundamentally messed up, and we get
disconnected from being because we are over focused on particular beings. We're failing to love
wisely. We're loving the individual things, and we're not loving the ground from which they spring.
Can you explain that a little more? What's the difference between the being and the supreme
being and why that gets us into trouble? Okay. So like, well, we talked about this before,
the supreme being is a particular being, whereas being is no thing. It's not any particular kind
of thing. And so if you're thinking of being as a being, you're thinking of it in a thingy way
about something that is fundamentally no thingness. And so then you're disconnecting yourself from
presumably ultimate reality. This takes me to Tillich. Tillich's great idea is understanding
faith as ultimate concern rather than a set of propositions that you're asserting.
So what are you ultimately concerned about? What do you want to be in right relationship to?
Ratio relicchio? And is that ultimate? Is that the ultimate reality that you conceive of?
Are those two things in sync? This has had a profound influence on me, and I think it's a
brilliant idea. So some of the others, how do they integrate? Maybe the second, so they're
called Young and Freud. Which team are you on? I'm on Young. Freud is the better writer.
But Young has, I think, a model of the psyche that is closer to where cognitive science is heading.
He's more prescient. Which aspect of his model is the psyche?
Directly. So Freud has a hydraulic model. The psyche is like a steam engine. Things are under
pressure, and there's a fluid that's moving around. It's like, shh, like this is a record
noted this. Young has an organic model. The psyche is like a living being. It's doing all this
opponent processing. It's doing all of this self-transcending and growing. And I think that's
a much better model of the psyche than the sort of steam engine model.
What do you think about their view of the subconscious mind? What do you think their
view and your own view of what's going on there in the shadow? So all that stuff, some good stuff?
Any stuff at all? Well, I mean, both Freud and Young are only talking about the psychodynamic
unconscious, which is only a small part of the unconscious. Can you elaborate?
They're talking about the aspects of the unconscious that have to do with your
sort of ego development and how you are understanding and interpreting yourself.
Yeah, but what else is there? There's the unconscious that allows you to turn the
noise coming out of my face hole into ideas. Also, there's the unconscious that's, yeah.
All that stuff, which is huge and powerful. And they didn't think about that. They're focused
on the big romantic stuff that you have to deal with through psychotherapy, that kind of stuff.
Which is relevant and important. I'm not dismissing. I'm not saying it doesn't exist,
but it's certainly not all of the unconscious. A lot of work that's going on,
my colleague and deep friend, Anderson Todd, is about, can we take the Jungian stuff
and the cognitive science stuff and can we integrate it together theoretically?
And so he's working on that, exactly that project.
But nevertheless, your sense is there is a subconscious.
Or at least an unconscious. I like the term unconscious. And Young continually reminded
people that the unconscious is unconscious, that we're not conscious of it. And that's
its fundamental property. Yeah. And then isn't the task of therapy then to make the unconscious
conscious? Yeah, to a degree, right? But also, I mean, yeah, to bring consciousness where there
was unconscious is part of Young's mythos. But it's also not the thought that that can be completed.
Part of the why you're extending the reach of the conscious mind is that so it can enter into
more proper dialogical relationship with the self-organizing system of the unconscious mind.
What do they have to say about the motivations of humans? So, for Freud joking, I said,
sex, there's so much of our mind is developing our young age, sexual interactions with the world
or whatever. Hence, the thing about the edible complex and all, I wanted to have sex with your
mother. What do you think about their description about what motivates humans? And what do you
think about the will to power from Nietzsche? Which camp are you in there? What motivates humans?
Sex or power? I think Plato's right. And I think there's a connection for me. Plato's my first
philosopher. Young's my first psychologist. And Young is very much the Plato of the psyche.
You never forget your first. Yeah, you never do. You never do. And I think we have,
I reject the monological mind. I reject the monophasic mind model. I think we are multi-centered.
I think we have different centers of motivation that operate according to different principles
to satisfy different problems. And that part of the task of our humanity is to get those
different centers into some internal culture by which they are optimally cooperating rather than
in conflict with each other. What advice would you give to young people? Today, they're in high
school trying to figure out what they're going to do with their life. Maybe they're in college.
What advice would you give how to have a career they can be proud of or how to have a life they
can be proud of? So the first thing is find an ecology of practices and a community that supports
them without involving you in believing things that contravene our best understood science
so that wisdom and virtue, especially how they show up in relationships, are primary to you.
This will sound ridiculous, but if you take care of that, the other things you want are more
likely to occur because what you most want is you, what you want at when you're approaching your death
is what were the relationships you cultivated to yourself, to other people, to the world. And
what did you do to improve the chance of them being deep and profound relationships?
That's an interesting ecology of practice. Finding a place where a lot of people are doing
different things that are interesting, interplay with each other, but at the same time is not a
cult where ideas can flourish. Now, how the hell do you know? In a place where people are really
excited about doing stuff, that's very ripe for cult formation. Especially if they're a wash
in a culture in which we have ever expanding waves of bullshit. Yes, precisely. Try to keep
away from the bullshit is the advice. I take this very seriously and I was with a bunch of
people in Vermont at the respond retreat, people, Rafe Kelly was there, a bunch of people who have
set up colleges of practices and created communities. And I have good reason to find all of these
people trustworthy. And so we gather together to try and generate real diologos, flow in distributed
cognition, exercise the collective intelligence and try and address that problem, both in terms of
you know, meta-curriculum that we can offer emerging communities in terms of practices of
vetting, how we will self-govern the federation we're forming so that we can resist gurification.
Gurification of people or ideas. Both. Yeah. Both. Some of us just get unlucky. Some of us get
unlucky and we all at respond, we all had a tremendous sense of urgency around this,
but we were trying to balance it about not being premature, but there it was going to,
I mean, there's, we're going to produce a meta-curriculum that's coming in months. There's
going to be a scientific paper about integrating the scientific work on wisdom with this practitioner
based ideas about the cultivation of wisdom. There's going to be projects about how we can
create a self-correcting vetted vetting system. So we can say to people, we think this ecology
is legit. It's in good fellowship with all these other legit ecologies. We don't know about that
one. We're hesitant about that one. It's not in good fellowship. We have concerns. Here's why we
have our concerns, et cetera. And you may say, well, who are you to do that? It's like nobody,
but somebody's got to do it, right? And that's what it comes down to. And so we're going to give it
our best effort. It's worth a try. You talked about the meaning crisis in human civilization,
but in your own personal life, what has been a dark place you've ever gone in your mind?
Has there been difficult times in your life where you really struggled? Yes. So when I left,
I was left fundamentalist Christianity. And for a while, I was just sort of a hard-bitten atheist.
The problem with leaving the belief structure was that I didn't deal with all the non-propositional
things that had gotten into me, all the procedures and habits and all the perspectives and all the
identities and the trauma associated with that. So I required therapy. It required years of
meditation and Tai Chi. And I'm still wrestling with it. But for the first four or five years,
I described it like this. I called it the black burning. I felt like there was a
blackness that was on fire inside of me, precisely because the religion had left a taste
for the transcendent in my mouth, but the food it had given me, food in square quotes had soured
in my stomach and made me nauseous. And the juxtaposition of those seemed like an
irresolvable problem for me. That was a very, very dark time for me. Did it feel lonely?
When it was very bad, it felt extremely lonely. And deeply alienating,
the universe seemed absurd. And there was also existential anxiety. I talk about these things
for a reason. I don't just talk about them as things I'm pointing to. I'm talking about them
as seeing in myself and in people I care, having undergone them and how they can bring you close
to self-destructive. I started engaging in kinds of self-destructive behavior.
So the meaning crisis to you is not just the thing you look outside and see many people
struggling. You yourself have struggled. That's, in fact, the narrative is I struggled with it,
thinking it was a purely personal, idiosyncratic thing. I started learning the kogsai. I started
doing the tai chi and the meditation. I started doing all this, right? Socratic philosophy.
And when I started to talk about these pieces, I saw my students' eyes light up. And I realized,
oh, wait, maybe this isn't just something I'm going through. And then talking to them and
then doing the research and expanding it out. It's like, oh, many people in a shared fashion
and also in an individual lonely fashion are going through a meaning crisis.
Well, we talked a lot about wisdom and meaning. And you said that the goal is to love wisely.
So let me ask about love. What's the role of love in the human condition?
It's central. I mean, it's even central to reason and rationality. This is Plato, but Spinoza,
the most logical of the rationalists. The ethics is written like Euclid's geometry.
But he calls it the ethics for a reason because he wants to talk about the blessed life. And what
does he say? He says that ultimately, reason needs love because love is what brings reason out of
being entrapped in the gravity well of egocentrism. And Murdoch, Iris Murdoch said, I think really
beautifully, love is when you painfully realize that something other than yourself is real.
Escaping the gravity well of egocentrism. Beautifully put, a beautiful way to end it,
John. You're a beautiful human being. Thank you for struggling in your own mind with the
search for meaning and encouraging others to do the same. And ultimately, to learn how to love
wisely. Thank you so much for talking today. It's been a great pleasure, Lex. I really enjoyed it
a lot. Thank you so much. Thanks for listening to this conversation with John Rovecchi. To support
this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, let me leave you
with some words from Herman Hessay and Siddhartha. I've always believed, and I still believe, that
whatever good or bad fortune may come our way, we can always give it meaning and transform it
into something of value. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.